
How was the Chernobyl and Pripyat evacuation ?


Those who knew the distribution of radioactive substances, hastened to leave the infected area on their own in the morning, but it was not very successful.

chernobyl evacuation footage


• There were no mobile phones at that time.
Telephones were not installed at all, but they also had a problem, the telephone connection did not work.
And not only in the zone of defeat, there was no connection with Kiev.
Most of the population, especially the male, was involved in the liquidation of the consequences and was at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
Call home and say that you need to leave could not.
• Low information content of the population.
Neither one really knew the extent to which pollution occurred.
Of course, this was the era of atomic research, but they did not keep their own dosimeters.
• Everyone until the last hoped for a positive outcome of events.

Evacuation of Chernobyl-2 (Duga radar)


How to evacuate a closed object tells Andrei Shabanov.
At the time of accident, he was 10 years old.


That morning he went to school, all classes were held, and only at the last lesson the teacher announced that an accident had occurred in the city of Pripyat.
What happened, or who did not explain, even the parents.
All the students were told to return home and not leave their apartments.
All the military city could not voluntarily leave.
The entire garrison participated in the elimination of the accident, after which it was transferred to a new place of military service.

Evacuation of Pripyat


In order to produce the evacuation of 47 thousand people, two thousand buses are needed.
The district administration took time to gather the necessary amount of transport, make it refuel, instruct drivers, coordinate their actions with the military and finally reach the city.

Chernobyl evacuation announcement:


Buses were taken from bus stations in Kiev.
The country plunged into a transport collapse, or whoever does not say anything, tickets at railway stations do not sell, people are advised not to leave their homes.
At night, the administration of Pripyat conducted a limited briefing of administrative personnel, conversation was conducted with staff of hospitals, schools, kindergartens.


Pripyat chernobyl evacuation video:


Chernobyl Pripyat evacuation timeline:



At 12:20 the briefing was held in the city police department.
City was divided into six sectors.
Each was assigned to responsible, for each entrance of residential house was allocated two police officers.


At 12:30 the police arrived at their places and began to instruct the residents.


At 13:10 an official announcement was given by radio (chernobyl evacuation message): "Attention, Dear comrades!
The City Council of People’s Deputies reports that in connection with accident at Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the city of Pripyat, an unfavorable radiation situation develops.
Party and Soviet bodies and military units take necessary measures.
However, in order to ensure the complete safety of people, and, in first place, children, it becomes necessary to temporarily evacuate the residents of city to nearby settlements in Kyiv region.
To this end, to each apartment building today, on April 27, starting from fourteen hours after zero, a bus will be served accompanied by police officers and representatives of the city executive committee.
It is recommended to take documents with you, extremely necessary things, as well as, for the first time, food.
Heads of enterprises and institutions defined the circle of employees who remain in place to ensure the normal functioning of the city’s enterprises.
All houses for the period of evacuation will be guarded by police.
Comrades, temporarily leaving your home, do not forget, please, close the windows, turn off the electrical and gas appliances, turn off the water taps.
Please observe peace, orderliness and order during temporary evacuation. "


At 14:00 the residents began to take buses, by 16:30 the city was evacuated.


At 18:00 the police conducted a second round of apartments to make sure there were no residents.



Together with police officers among the latter, city was left by administration staff and members of the expert commission.
On the borders of city there was a cordon.


Evacuation Chernobyl


Chernobyl was evacuated later, as it was not much further from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
The evacuation of inhabitants took place according to the already worked out scheme.
Police officers walked around the apartments and houses, explained to all residents.
Assigned the time of collection, placed residents on buses.


In what place were people evacuated?


All residents were placed in nearby villages, the heads of rural settlements were informed in advance.
Two or four buses were brought to village, and head of the settlement distributed the evacuees to their homes.
As people say, survivors of the evacuation, there was no quarrel, everyone treated with sympathy and understanding, shared food and things.


Some then left for relatives, those who had no one to go had to wait for new houses.
New houses were built at an accelerated pace in the Kiev region.


