



**************************************************************************************************************
query = phishing
document number 1: 
7 Ways to Recognize a Phishing Email: Email Phishing Examples


"You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time."
–Abraham Lincoln


Email phishing examples


Are you sure that email from UPS is actually from UPS?
(Or Costco, BestBuy, or the myriad of unsolicited emails you receive every day?)
Companies and individuals are often targeted by cybercriminals via emails designed to look like they came from a legitimate bank, government agency, or organization.
In these emails, the sender asks recipients to click on a link that takes them to a page where they will confirm personal data, account information, etc.

SEE ALSO: Fighting Phishing Email Scams: What You Should Know

What is phishing?


This technique is called phishing, and it’s a way hackers con you into providing your personal information or account data.
Once your info is obtained, hackers create new user credentials or install malware (such as backdoors) into your system to steal sensitive data.

SEE ALSO: Examples of common phishing attempts.

Phishing emails today rarely begin with, "Salutations from the son of the deposed Prince of Nigeria..." and it's becoming increasingly difficult to distinguish a fake email from a verified one.
But, most have subtle hints of their scammy nature.
Here are seven email phishing examples to help you recognize a malicious email and maintain email security.

1.
Legit companies don’t request your sensitive information via email


Chances are if you receive an unsolicited email from an institution that provides a link or attachment and asks you to provide sensitive information, it’s a scam.
Most companies will not send you an email asking for passwords, credit card information, credit scores, or tax numbers, nor will they send you a link from which you need to login.

Notice the generic salutation at the beginning, and the unsolicited web link attachment?


2.
Legit companies usually call you by your name


Phishing emails typically use generic salutations such as "Dear valued member," "Dear account holder," or "Dear customer."
If a company you deal with required information about your account, the email would call you by name and probably direct you to contact them via phone.

BUT, some hackers simply avoid the salutation altogether.
This is especially common with advertisements.
The phishing email below is an excellent example.
Everything in it is nearly perfect.
So, how would you spot it as potentially malicious?


This is a very convincing email.
For me, the clue was in the email domain.
More on that below.


3.
Legit companies have domain emails


Don’t just check the name of the person sending you the email.
Check their email address by hovering your mouse over the ‘from’ address.
Make sure no alterations (like additional numbers or letters) have been made.
Check out the difference between these two email addresses as an example of altered emails: michelle@paypal.com michelle@paypal23.com Just remember, this isn’t a foolproof method.
Sometimes companies make use of unique or varied domains to send emails, and some smaller companies use third party email providers.

"Costco's" logo is just a bit off.
This is what the Costco logo is supposed to look like.


See the difference?
Subtle, no?


4.
Legit companies know how to spell


Possibly the easiest way to recognize a scammy email is bad grammar.
An email from a legitimate organization should be well written.
Little known fact – there’s actually a purpose behind bad syntax.
Hackers generally aren’t stupid.
They prey on the uneducated believing them to be less observant and thus, easier targets.

In addition to the generic salutation, grammar gaffes are usually a good clue that something is wrong.
"Please fill this form…" And notice the ‘17’ reference in the middle of the sentence.


5.
Legit companies don’t force you to their website


Sometimes phishing emails are coded entirely as a hyperlink.
Therefore, clicking accidentally or deliberately anywhere in the email will open a fake web page, or download spam onto your computer.

This whole email was a gigantic hyperlink, so if you clicked anywhere in the email, you would initiate the malicious attack.


6.
Legit companies don’t send unsolicited attachments


Unsolicited emails that contain attachments reek of hackers.
Typically, authentic institutions don’t randomly send you emails with attachments, but instead direct you to download documents or files on their own website.

Like the tips above, this method isn’t foolproof.
Sometimes companies that already have your email will send you information, such as a white paper, that may require a download.
In that case, be on the lookout for high-risk attachment file types include .exe, .scr, and .zip.
(When in doubt, contact the company directly using contact information obtained from their actual website.)

Just remember, curiosity killed the cat.


7.
Legit company links match legitimate URLs


Just because a link says it’s going to send you to one place, doesn’t mean it’s going to.
Double check URLs.
If the link in the text isn't identical to the URL displayed as the cursor hovers over the link, that's a sure sign you will be taken to a site you don’t want to visit.
If a hyperlink’s URL doesn’t seem correct, or doesn’t match the context of the email, don’t trust it.
Ensure additional security by hovering your mouse over embedded links (without clicking!)
and ensure the link begins with https://.

Although very convincing, the real Nokia wouldn't be sending you a "Save your stuff" email from info@news.nokia.com


It doesn’t matter if you have the most secure security system in the world.
It takes only one untrained employee to be fooled by a phishing attack and give away the data you’ve worked so hard to protect.
Make sure both you and your employees understand these specific email phishing examples and all of the telltale signs of a phishing attempt.

David Ellis (GCIH, QSA, PFI, CISSP) is VP of Forensic Investigations at SecurityMetrics with over 25 years of law enforcement and investigative experience.



####
document number 2: 
Phishing Case Studies: How Attackers are Taking their Time, and Taking your Money


We, the users of the Internet, have been the targets of phishing scams for over 20 years.
Early instances include AOHell (circa 1995 – when the term "phishing" first took off) and the LoveBug (early 2000), which spammed victims’ address books.
While these early phishing attacks were decidedly simplistic, today’s phishing attacks are far more advanced and difficult to stop.
With a higher volume of high-value data stored online, our money, identities, and critical corporate data are all at risk.
The stakes are much higher now than in the mid-90s.

Despite having two decades to figure out how to foil phishing scams, a remarkably high percentage are still successful.
And email phishing is still the dominant attack form, with 44% of 2016 incidents social in nature (these email phishing scams are also the top delivery vehicle for malware and ransomware).
So why are they still so successful?
One reason is because phishing attacks prey on our human nature.
Attackers are betting that we’ll click before we report, that we’ll trust rather than verify, and that we’ll respond to any email that has our corporate logo at the top.
At the heart of that problem is a serious lack of training.
We’ve also seen a rise in highly sophisticated, slow-burn attacks.
Malicious attackers are spending more time creating personalized campaigns that target high value data and employees, sometimes investing many months into the research and planning of the attacks.

As a company that offers social engineering services and customized cyber awareness trainings, we’ve spent years tracking phishing trends and developing strategies to stop them.
Recently, though, we’ve seen several novel phishing schemes (including one by our own social engineering team) that highlight the way these attacks are changing.

Disclaimer: For the privacy and safety of the companies we research and work with, we have redacted or changed company names, locations, and industries in the following accounts.


Lesson 1: Phishing Attacks Rely on Our Click-First Mentality


After falling victim to a recent spear phishing attack, a company requested that we assess the control breakdowns and help prevent similar attacks in the future.
It quickly became clear to our team that this attack was successful because employees were too click-happy.
Rather than taking the time to scrutinize emails and report suspicious behaviors, employees clicked… and clicked… and clicked… and caused some serious damage.

In these employees’ defense, this was no simple phishing attack – but that’s the point.
Today’s phishing attacks aren’t simple.
Hackers are spending days, weeks, even months researching companies and crafting personalized emails that resonate with their targets.
Let’s take a look at the three phases of this attack.

Phase 1: Planning


The goal of this attack was to gain access to employees’ payroll information, change their bank account numbers to offshore accounts, and intercept their paychecks.
Through some light research, the hackers figured out the dates for spring break for most schools in the target area, as well as the dates when the company was likely to process payroll.
The attackers set this as the window for their attack.
With many employees out of the office, the attack would be more difficult to detect and more difficult to stop.

With their timeframe in place, the attackers needed to gain access to at least one employee’s email to start their campaign.
To do this, they set up a fake email account that emulated the email address of the CEO and sent a simple phishing email to a handful of employees.
Most didn’t take the bait, but one did – and that’s all they needed.

The email asked her to review a Word document.
But in order to read it, she had to provide authentication credentials – a somewhat unusual but not unheard of request.
Once the attackers had her credentials, they lurked in her inbox, gathering information about the company.



Screenshot of the fake login page used to gather employee credentials




As you can see in the above screenshot, the hackers weren’t sloppy with their initial email campaign.
The attachment looked official, complete with impeccable grammar, and the fake login page was sold with official Microsoft logos.

Phase 2: Execution


After some time passed, the hackers used the breached employee’s account to launch an email campaign on behalf of the CEO, asking employees to update their Workday credentials (the company’s payroll system) before the next pay period began.

Knowing that a massive email campaign would spark suspicion, they sent the emails in small waves.
They also created a special folder in her inbox that intercepted replies, which the attackers monitored to erase responses and keep the account owner unaware.

The hackers also took special care in crafting the perfect email.
In the first wave, they sent emails that had flawless grammar, used familiar syntax, and mimicked a corporate tone.

Phase 3: Success


Once the emails were sent, employees started clicking.

By the end of the fourth wave, 50+ employees had clicked the link and submitted their Workday credentials.
With access to their Workday accounts, the attackers changed employee banking information to offshore accounts, and routed the payroll checks through those accounts and onto other places.

Beyond the phishing emails, what broke down?
Well, the manual control within the payroll department – one that requires a payroll employee to manually "Approve" each account change – was not sufficient.
Despite receiving 50+ account change requests in one pay period (for a company that averages 10 in that span), the payroll employee did not sound the alarm.

In total, the hackers stole around $120,000.

Lesson Learned


After meeting with the company, we learned that they had not performed social engineering prior to this attack, and their cyber awareness training had room for improvement.
This lack of training and testing left employees unaware of how to recognize sophisticated malicious behavior or report suspicious emails.

Improved cyber awareness training with clear processes on how to report unusual emails or behaviors as well as regular testing to heighten employees’ vigilance can change the "click-first" mentality.
In addition, implementing a tool that identifies emails from an external source can help employees take the time to stop and evaluate whether it’s from a trusted source.

Lesson 2: Phishing Attacks are Successful Because We Prefer to Trust Rather Than Verify


A company recently requested that we help them trace a phishing attack that resulted in the theft of more than $200,000.
After diving in, we concluded that this organization – which relies heavily on third parties – was attacked through a breach at one of its vendors.

Disguised as a third party, the hackers sent the company’s finance team an invoice for $212,000 with a new ACH number.
Production was under way and an invoice for this amount was expected.
The hackers explained away the new ACH number by citing routine changes in the accounting department of the company.

Rather than verifying this change with an approved contact, the company paid the invoice with the new ACH number.

However, a few weeks later, the

real

vendor reached out and asked for their payment.
They wanted the $212,000 payment before they finished production.
When the company went back to check their records, they discovered that the email they received a few weeks prior was actually from comp@connpanyname.com rather than comp@companyname.com (notice the subtle change in the domain), and that their payment went to a bank account in Kuala Lampur while the vendor was based in mainland China.

Lesson Learned


In this case, it’s pretty clear that the company’s third-party vendor had been breached and the attackers were leveraging the data they gained through this breach for even greater financial gain.
While this allowed the attackers to craft a very targeted campaign, a verification process for changes to vendor information could have helped foil this attack.
In addition, a robust vendor risk management program could have given the company a better understanding of its vendors’ security and privacy policies and procedures.

Lesson 3: Personalization is Playing a Big Role in the Success of Phishing Attacks


A company recently requested that we test their cyber resiliency to phishing attacks.
This time, we got to be the hackers, and using publicly available information from their website and sources like LinkedIn, we were able to craft a very customized campaign, which yielded a high success rate.

After creating a fake LinkedIn account, our team connected with nearly 800 employees at this company and leveraged the info on these pages to build an email list.
In accordance with our pre-determined rules of engagement, our team built an email that targeted recipients on a personal level.



Body of the phishing email used to gather employee credentials in this social engineering campaign




The email notified select employees that they had been nominated for an employee recognition award.
In order to receive their award (an Amazon gift card), the employees were told they needed to agree to the terms and conditions.
Upon clicking the link, they were brought to a cloned version of the company SSO page (the URL was just one letter different from the company’s official SSO page) and asked to enter their credentials.

The emails went to 450 employees.
Nearly 250 opened the email, and more than 130 logged in.
Once they logged in, employees were taken to a landing page that mimicked the corporate website where they downloaded the T as a Microsoft Word document.

The document prompted employees to enable macros in order to view it in its entirety.
Macros are disabled by Word by default, but the document included step-by step-instructions to allow them, which a number of employees followed without question.

Those who enabled the macros kicked off a PowerShell script that sent an outbound connection to an outside server that requested the full payload.
While a corporate security tool blocked a number of these connections, 19% of the connections were still successful.
This granted our team command-line access to the host as the compromised users, giving us access to a number of valuable internal resources.

On top of all of this, a number of employees who received these emails responded to them and asked for technical assistance.
Our team asked 18 of them for their login details in order to assist, and three of them obliged.
Had we chosen to, we could have leveraged this position of technical authority for further campaigns.

Lesson Learned


A lot can be learned about a company and its corporate identity from very public sources like social media.
Hackers are able to leverage email conventions, titles, and company branding from these sources to build highly customized campaigns that make it extremely difficult for employees to detect suspicious behavior.
This example highlights the importance of testing employees so they are aware of the evolving tactics attackers are using, and then building robust training on how to recognize and report these attacks.
This training should include best practices for social media, like evaluating connection requests on LinkedIn and regularly reviewing and updating personal privacy settings.

Want more fascinating case studies like this?


Subscribe to Focal Point's Risk Rundown below - a once-a-month newsletter with templates, webinars, interesting white papers, and news you may have missed.
Thousands of your colleagues and competitors have signed up!
You can unsubscribe at any time.



####
document number 3: 
Case of spear phishing in India


Fraudsters are evolving with the technology.
Couple of years ago, Phishing was replaced by Vishing and now SpearPhishing is the new baby on the blocks.
Spear Phishing in India is not very common.
Phishing was a generic attack without having any information about the victims, Vishing was voice based phishing but the frauds are now getting personal.
SpearPhishing attack is committed with a specific person in mind.

Spear phishing in India


Certified Forensic Accounting Professionals are emerging as a powerful community, across the world.
One such CFAP was engaged by a pharmaceutical company with a request to conduct a routine assessment of its system security.
During his analysis, he discovered that some of the client’s PCs were infected by certain malware.
This malware was transferring research data to a location which was based out of Indore.
Head office of one of the competitor’s of the pharmaceutical company was based in Indore too.

Business faced a cyber attack, when a junior research scientist unwittingly helped infect the PC of a senior scientist.
In India, generally the corporate networks are affected by the employees who, though unintentionally, use a company owned computer to visit porn sites.
In this case, however, the junior scientist was not even watching any objectionable content but was simply trying to do his job.

The trouble began when he received an email from an apparently known, legitimate source.
Attached to the actually phony message was a malicious PDF attachment purporting to be the document of the kind the junior scientist and his supervisor were working to complete a very important research project.
Because neither its apparent source nor content appeared suspicious, the junior scientist opened the attachment.
When its contents turned out to be unfamiliar, he sought guidance by forwarding the message to the senior scientist who also opened the attachment.

The attachment apparently came from some vendor who was part of the research work too.
Junior scientist had no way of knowing that his email account was compromised.
When the attachment was opened, it executed malware that infected their PCs and spread to sensitive system modules that the senior scientist had access to.
Once the hackers were able to scan through the entire system they could simply take out the information they wanted to access.
Some very important research and the business plans.
To get the valuable information competitor never entered the premises of the victim pharmaceutical company.
The total damage was calculated at Rs.
7.6 crores.
In various countries the Certified Forensic Accounting Professionals are called in to assess the damages caused to the companieI because of the frauds.

This was an attack that involved advance planning and research that had nothing to do with technology.
These hackers were skilled

spearphishers

, whose precisely aimed attack sought a particular type of information accessible only to certain senior staff members of this pharmaceutical company.

The hackers were anxious to not draw attention of their attempt, so they sent only one message to one carefully selected user — the junior Scientist.
How did they know to whom to send it?
These fraudsters used a very simple technique.
When the competitor company hosted a conference related to the subject, an email was sent to the senior scientist.
It was an invite to be a speaker.
The mail reached him when senior scientist was on vacation and his email sent an auto-responder email.
This email also requested to contact the junior scientist in case of emergency.
Every fraudster is not however, as lucky as this.
In most of the cases of spear phishing they have to do extensive research and reconnaissance — much of it offline — on who worked with whom in the target firms and each employee’s nature of work.

Sometimes, hackers explore the firm’s email address-naming convention.
So, when the technological part of their scheme — a virus – gets ready , the hackers know to whom to send it.

Certified Forensic Accounting Professionals are investigating some of the most challenging assignments of investigation of the frauds and aspirants can get into the right network of professionals by obtaining the most valuable certification in India.



####
document number 4: 
Podcast Cyber security &amp;amp; Technology news: Binance phishing scam &amp;amp; Oculus Rift Fixed


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


Binance, a cryptocurrency exchange has responded to claims that they were hacked and show that it was in fact a clever phishing scam, not a hack.
Oculus rift, which we discussed yesterday has fixed their issue making oculus rift headsets work again.

IN THIS EPISODE


Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Planet Zuda, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 5: 
Is that you Amazon?


Another day closer to Christmas, the shopping urgency (anxiety?)
increases, and cybercriminals are looking to take advantage of unsuspecting users.
This week the EdgeWave Threat Detection Center caught a very impressive phishing campaign spoofing Amazon.
While this falls squarely within the "always be sure before you click", the apparent legitimacy is sure to catch enough users to make for a very happy holiday for at least one criminal group.

Let’s start with an example of a legitimate Amazon order confirmation email.

Sender: Amazon.com

@amazon.com>


And now the phishing sample.


The phishing email was sent from colchonesrelax.com.co, a bed retailer in Columbia.
The gateway used for sending the email correlates to the retailer, indicating a compromised email server.


While there are enough differences to generate suspicion, it’s an impressive fake and easy for many users to consider legitimate and happily click the Order Details button.
And clicking the Order Details button is the last thing anyone should do with this email.

Clicking Order Details connects to unique subdirectory at lancang.desa.id and downloads a Microsoft Word document titled order_details.doc.
Opening this document activates a macro that contacts palapa2.lazeon.com at IP 101.50.1.12 (the same server that hosts lancang.desa.id, located in Indonesia) and downloads keyandsymbol.exe to a new created folder at \AppData\Local\keyandsymbol.
When executed, keyandsymbol.exe then reaches out to www.funtelo.com and www.ceeetwh.org to download additional components.
Interestingly, these other servers are in Houston and Lansing.
Playing Dora the Explorer for a moment, we’ve encountered a compromised email server in Columbia sending phishing email with a link to a server in Indonesia that downloads malware which then contacts compromised servers in the United States.
The holidays are truly global!

To prevent detection by traditional email security gateways, the campaign uses various iterations of certain details.
EdgeWave analysts have seen multiple subdirectories on the compromised web server used to deliver the initial malware:


/AMAZON/Details/122018


/AMAZON/Clients_Messages/12_18


/AMAZON/Clients/122018



We have also seen multiple subject lines:


Your Amazon.com order


Order #153-5168164-0006599


Amazon order details


Your order 162-2672000-0034071 has shipped


Order #188-1301600-0441976 details



It’s important to remember that cybercriminals are very aware of current technologies, and spend time learning how to bypass traditional email security gateways.
The iterations listed above are liable to fly right past most gateways, landing in the user’s Inbox – nirvana for the modern cybercriminal.
This is exactly why EdgeWave believes the Inbox is the next cybersecurity battleground.

For security professionals.


Keyandsymbol.exe


MD5 – 3b3a332694ec943e9e0238a9885ef91a


SHA256 – e9b7d8ac373674cfd789ac2cb9681a5a2abc4d34a8e1eeeae1ae2a799d2ba01a




Block communications TO/FROM domain and IP lancang.desa.id – 101.50.1.12


Be cautious of traffic TO/FROM domain and IP www.funtelo.com – 192.185.2.61


Be cautious of traffic TO/FROM domain and IP www.ceeetwh.org – 184.106.55.45




####
document number 6: K0C03TY1T.rsd
Amnesty International uncovers phishing campaign against human rights activists


A phishing e-mail aimed at worker rights activists in Qatar and Nepal crafted to fool targets into giving up their credentials.


Over the course of the last year, a number of human rights organizations, labor unions, and journalists were targeted in a "phishing" campaign that attempted to steal the Google credentials of targets by luring them into viewing documents online.
The campaign, uncovered by Amnesty International, is interesting largely because of the extent to which whoever was behind the attack used social media to create a complete persona behind the messages—a fictional rights activist named Safeena Malik.

Malik translates from Arabic as "King," so Amnesty International refers to the spear-phishing campaign in a report posted to Medium today as "Operation Kingphish."

The party or parties behind the operation created Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, and Twitter profiles for "Safeena Malik" using a young woman's photos, which were apparently harvested from another social media account.
"It appears that the attackers may have impersonated the identity of a real young woman and stole her pictures to construct the fake profile," wrote Nex, a security researcher working with Amnesty International, "along with a professional biography also stolen from yet another person."

While there was only one post on the Twitter account associated with the constructed identity—a one-word "hi" post when the account was created in December 2014—"she" was much more active on Facebook and LinkedIn (where the identity had accumulated more than 500 connections).

The operators behind the "Safeena Malik" identity used their amassed contacts to specifically target people associated with the rights of migrant workers in Qatar—journalists, activists, and labor union officials.
Amnesty International was not directly targeted in the campaign.
Large numbers of workers from Nepal and other countries have been brought to Qatar, particularly to perform construction work on stadiums and facilities for the 2022 World Cup—and there have been concerns raised over the treatment of those workers.
So far, more than 1,200 migrant workers from Nepal and India have died working on the World Cup projects.

Targets would receive e-mails and social media messages from "Safeena Malik" in bursts, asking them to look at documents or presentations on Qatari human rights issues or offering forged requests to link up via Google's Hangouts chat service.
The phishing e-mails would lead to a phishing site crafted specifically for the targets, presenting their (harvested) Google account avatar as part of a page mimicking a Google account login.
After capturing their credentials (in the cases where the links purported to be for documents), the page would forward them to an actual Google Docs document pilfered from another source to reduce suspicions about what had happened.

The campaign bears all the hallmarks of the textbook social media/social engineering campaign "Robin Sage," an experiment by security researcher Thomas Ryan.
Ryan created a fake profile on Facebook for Robin Sage—a young, attractive "Cyber Threat Analyst" at Naval Network Warfare Command.
("Robin Sage" is also the name of the two-week final exercise that Army Special Forces candidates are put through eight times a year at Fort Bragg, North Carolina—which one might have thought would have tipped off someone.)
In his research, presented at the Black Hat conference in 2010, Ryan reported:

By the end of this experiment, Robin finished the month having accumulated hundreds of connections through various social networking sites.
Contacts included executives at government entities such as the NSA, DOD and Military Intelligence groups.
Other friends came from Global 500 corporations.
Throughout the experiment Robin was offered gifts, government and corporate jobs, and options to speak at a variety of security conferences…Through this 28‐day experiment, it became evident that the propagation of a false identity via social networking websites can be rampant and viral.
Much of the information revealed to Robin Sage violated OPSEC and PERSEC procedures.


It is not known who is behind the phishing campaigns.
But some of the accounts that were compromised were logged into from an IP address connected to an Internet provider in Doha, Qatar.
The Qatari government has denied involvement.



####
document number 7: 
I got caught Phishing !






####
document number 8: 
New phishing scam targets Gmail users






####
document number 9: 
Chatbot Used by Phishing Scammers to Help Victims Provide Their Data



####
document number 10: 
I Fell for a Phishing Scam: A Case Study


Salam Alaikoum brothers and sisters, Jummuah Mubarak


Every feminist should be lined up against a wall and sh0t


poor chose to be poor, you don't work therefore you choose to be poor


this website is older than bernie sanders


Hey guys, its been 14 days since Halloween and the edgy kid next door is still hanging on the tree, what should I do?


I tried to get laid the other night in the Vatican but someone scammed me when I tried calling.
Don't Recommend.
God bless children.


hi nephew!
wanna go into my room and play?
ol' uncle sam might show you a few moves if you lucky.


Waz trying to be some quality jewz but an ad popped up and zaid that ze allies won ze war ffs


hi guys!
I have 3 happy children, they are all antivax and vegan.
they just all got vaccinated with ebola but that's ok because I argued with the manager.
Thanks guys


Im selling 5 slaves, $40 each, they are hard working and come with a 3 years warranty, pls dm me if interested


Kurt, this article isn't good at all!!
Its aids :00


Hey everyone Im looking for a gf message me if interested


Wow!
This article is mind blowing!
-Your favourite rock artist


Can someone hire me?
I've worked in many different jobs, such as teacher, plumber, doctor, taxi driver and loads more.
Thanks!


good afternoon bais, just wanted to tell you all that i am selling my used panies for a good price!
DM if you are interested!


Wazzon bais its Riley Reid!
I just sucked lil pumps toes!


once when i was online shopping for some panties i recieved an email from microsoft, they told me id been watching way too much aggresive pornography so they needed me to pay, i wuickly swithced to the email and entered my details.
next thing i knew someone was using my account to buy panties, this left me furious as i myself wanted those stinky little panties


Dear Jack, I am a Researcher working at STV Productions in Scotland.
We are currently working on a new TV series about fraud and scams and would be interested in speaking to you regarding our new series.
I would appreciate if you could get in touch with me.
You can reach me on yourstories@stv.tv.
I look forward to hopefully hearing from you, Warm wishes, Kirsty


Dear Jack, I am a Researcher working at STV Productions in Scotland.
We are currently working on a new TV series about fraud and scams and would be interested in speaking to you regarding our new series.
I would appreciate if you could get in touch with me.
You can reach me on yourstories@stv.tv.
I look forward to hopefully hearing from you, Warm wishes, Kirsty


Dear Jack, I am a Researcher working at STV Productions in Scotland.
We are currently working on a new TV series about fraud and scams and would be interested in speaking to you regarding our new series.
I would appreciate if you could get in touch with me.
You can reach me on yourstories@stv.tv.
I look forward to hopefully hearing from you, Warm wishes, Kirsty


I have also read this article and I agree with it.


I have read this article and I agree with it.


I agree with this article and have read it


Can someone please tell me how to delete my personal details on a private website.


It was a windy day, back in marple hall school.
I was selling then I saw follet and soiled myself


Dear Jack, I am a Researcher working at STV Productions in Scotland.
We are currently working on a new TV series about fraud and scams and would be interested in speaking to you regarding our new series.
I would appreciate if you could get in touch with me.
You can reach me on yourstories@stv.tv.
I look forward to hopefully hearing from you, Warm wishes, Kirsty


I have read the article and I agree with it.



####
document number 11: 
Hackers Learned "Do-It-Yourself"


If there's an open window, a crook will climb in.
If there's a crack in a network's operations, a hacker will slip through it and find a way to do damage.

Individuals and business need to learn that hackers are always on the prowl, but large organizations are at greater risk because they have more to lose—and hackers know it.
A major data breach in 2014 proved that companies are making serious mistakes when they don't make network safety a top, corporate-wide priority.

That's the lesson The Home Depot learned...the hard way.
Because in April 2014, hackers found their way into Home Depot's security systems, and in the process, pulled off the biggest retail credit card breach in U.S. history.

The hackers compromised (meaning they got access to) 56 million Home Depot credit card customers.
They also stole 53 million customer email addresses.

What The Home Depot learned, as did everyone else, was that network security needs to be in place not just at obvious entry points for hackers, but also throughout the entire system.
Examining the safeguards that had been in place prior to the attack, here's what Home Depot concluded:


Home Depot had taken too long over the previous few years to increase its security.


They had spent more time and money on detecting security breaches instead of anticipating where hackers might attack.


Even a chief executive who left Target in October of 2014 said, "Data security just wasn't high enough in our mission statement."



You might think that the email address theft isn't so serious, but what it does is provide hackers email access to shoppers with active accounts.
A hacker can use the information to send deceptive email messages to Home Depot customers with the hope of tricking some of them into giving away vital information, such as their Social Security numbers.

And the only thing that Home Depot really did about the email theft was to tell customers to "be on guard" for phishing attempts.
You have to wonder if Home Depot customers would like to reply to the retail giant, "Be on guard for hackers!"

Hackers learn "do-it-yourself."


According to Home Depot's own investigation, the hackers got into their systems in a unique way...and in a way they hadn't expected: The hackers infiltrated the system indirectly—they stole a password from a Home Depot vendor, a company that Home Depot works with.

That's the same thing that happened to Target stores.
Hackers busted into Target's systems by first sneaking through a back door, when they hacked into the account of a refrigeration company and then gained access to Target's system when the vendor submitted an invoice for payment electronically to Target.

You would think that companies with large networks (and millions of customers) would be on top of security gaps—unfortunately, that's not the case.

Through the window, and then inside.


Once the hackers got their foot in the system with the stolen password, they were like thieves at night, sneaking through vulnerable "doors," seeing what kinds of internal operations they could tinker with.
At one point, they came up against the heart of the computer operations running on Microsoft software.
The hackers found a vulnerable spot in the software and were able to gain access to the entire Home Depot operation system.
(Microsoft has since fixed the vulnerability for its customers with a software patch...but it was too late for Home Depot.)

Blending in with everyday business.


Once the hackers breached the system, they did their secret work, operating during normal business hours, stealing data, collecting data, transmitting it outside to their own computers...and erasing their steps without detection.
Amazingly, they blended right in with all the other operations.

And Home Depot, who thought they could spot a breach, was unaware of it all.

Eventually, the hacker's daily escapades led them to the data that comes from 7,500 self-checkout terminals at Home Depot (but not the cash registers run by employees).
The terminals were identified on the Home Depot computer system as "payment terminals"—which told the hackers they'd found something worthwhile.

Along the way, the hackers were installing malware—malicious software—that went undetected and then waited for an opportunity.
It worked, and they were able table to steal credit card numbers right from the self-checkout terminals.

We've been hacked!


The whole hacking episode was discovered only when Home Depot found out (along with others) that some suspicious credit account numbers were up for sale on an online forum for hackers Labor Day weekend, 2014.

Here's the ironic part:


Before the attack, Home Depot had gone through several years of what they thought were significant security updates.
In reflection, all of their moves were technologically behind the hackers' capabilities.


About the time (in April) that hackers first busted through, Home Depot was launching a project to boost security at their payment terminals to offset hackers—but the project moved at a slow pace and wasn't finished in time.


Also in April, as the hackers were frolicking inside and outside of Home Depot operations, Home Depot, totally unaware of what was happening, was putting together a book related to IT matters.
It was a comprehensive 50-page internal document on how to respond to a hack.



If there's a lesson for all of us, it's this: We need to be careful with all of our personal and financial information, because the companies and security experts we think are taking care of us are better at detecting what went wrong than they are at preventing it.



####
document number 12: 
Black Out in Ukraine: BlackEnergy in Power Grid Cyberattack


Articles

On 23 December 2015, hackers successfully penetrated three Ukrainian power distribution companies.
They struck the "Prykarpattyaoblenergo" power distribution center and switched off 30 substations ― seven 110kv substation and 23 35kv substation; hackers also attacked two other power grid companies leaving more than 230,000 residents in the dark for one to six hours.
In this article, you will read a comprehensible summary of the steps and stages of the attack and how the attackers used the BlackEnergy malware to carry out the "December 2015 Ukraine power grid cyberattack".


Attackers initiated the attacks with a spear-phishing campaign in the spring of 2015 targeting the IT staff and system administrators of several electricity distribution companies in Ukraine.
The phishing campaign delivered email to employees of three of the companies with a malicious Word document attached.
Once the employees clicked on the attachment, a popup displayed asking them to enable macros for the document.
A macro is a series of commands and patterns that you group together as a single command to automate frequently used tasks.
In our case, the macros included a VBA programming language allowing the control of software features.
If the employees followed the hackers’ instructions, a malware called BlackEnergy3 would infect their machines and open a backdoor to the hackers.

BlackEnergy


The BlackEnergy malware first appeared in 2007 as an HTTP-based toolkit that generated bots to conduct distributed-denial-of-service-attacks (DDoS).
A Russian-based group known as Sandworm (aka Voodoo Bear) is known to launch BlackEnergy targeted attacks.

BlackEnergy has been reported to be delivered via the following payloads:

Microsoft Word Documents (.doc, .docx)

Microsoft PowerPoint Slideshows (.pps files)

Infected Juniper Installer

Java Update Scams

Bogus Flash Player Installer

Compromised TeamViewer Installer

Bogus Microsoft System Executables (svchost.exe)

Backdoor Files (aliide.sys, amdide.sys, acpimi.sys, adpu320.sys)

Fake Integrated Drive Electronics Controller


The first version of the malware, released in 2007 and upgraded till 2008, was capable of launching DDoS attacks and stealing credentials.
The second iteration was equipped with Linux support, Windows plugins, encryption, rootkit, and 64-bit support.
The second version also had a msiexec.exe installer to bypass user account control on Windows.
The BlackEnergy 3 was upgraded with a regedt32.exe installer to modify the Windows NT configuration database or the Windows NT registry.
It was also linked to the KillDisk ― data destruction program that can securely erase every file on a hard drive.

Upon installation, the BlackEnergy 3 malware connected to command and control (C2) IP addresses to enable hackers to communicate with the malware and the infected systems.
These pathways allowed hackers to collect information from the environment and enable access.

Getting through the SCADA


The power grid companies segregated the SCADA networks with a firewall; Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) is a computer system responsible for gathering and analyzing real-time data, as well as discrete monitoring and controlling processes in industries; in this case, the SCADA is in charge of controlling the grid.

To get through the SCADA network, the hackers conducted extensive reconnaissance using the BlackEnergy 3 malware.
The malware was used in harvesting VPN credentials and lateral movements.

Payload summery

By using the stolen credentials, the hackers were able to pivot into the network segments where SCADA dispatch workstations and servers existed.
They then reconfigured the Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) which is responsible for providing backup power to two of the control centers.
This action was made to cause power outage not just for residents, but for the power companies as well.

After that, the hackers replaced the legitimate firmware on serial-to-Ethernet converters with malicious firmware at over 12 substations.
The serial-to-Ethernet converters are used to interpret commands from the SCADA network to the substation control systems.
Taking out the converters would prevent operators from sending remote commands to re-close breakers once a blackout occurred.

During the reconnaissance stage, the hackers studied each distribution management system for the grids and they likely had sufficient tools to evaluate and test their firmware prior to the execution of the actual attack.
Now they entered the SCADA networks through the hijacked VPNs and sent commands to disable the UPS systems they had already reconfigured.
To execute the actual attack, the hackers started to open the breakers taking at least 27 substations offline across the three energy companies.
Simultaneously, the hackers uploaded the malicious firmware to the serial-to-Ethernet gateway devices.
This ensured that even if the operator workstations were recovered, remote commands could not be issued to bring the substations back online.
During this time, the hackers also launched a telephone denial-of-service attack against customer call centers to prevent customers from calling in to report the power outage.
Similar to DDoS attacks, the TDoS flooded the center’s phone systems with thousands of bogus calls that seemed to come from Moscow.

After everything was done, the attackers used a malicious data destruction program called KillDisk to wipe files from operator stations.

KillDisk wipes or overwrites data in essential system files, causing computers to crash.
It also overwrites the master boot record, causing the infected computers to fail to reboot.

Attack Cyber Kill Chain Mapping


Main References:



####
document number 13: 
The ANU hack came down to a single email — here's what we know


ANU has released a 5,000-word report detailing an unprecedented hack on the university.
(ABC News: Niki Challis)


Without anyone clicking on a link, a massive cyber attack of unprecedented sophistication gained access to private information of potentially high-ranking officials across the globe.

Thanks to the release of a 5,000-word report into the incident, the public can see for the first time how sophisticated and extensive the attack on the ANU was.

For weeks, hackers quietly trawled through the computer system of the Australian National University (ANU) in Canberra.

It was months before ANU even realised the hackers had broken in, and almost a year later it remains a mystery just how damaging the attack was.

What is known is personal details were taken from a university that's educated some of the best and brightest people.

What was taken?


A forensic investigation of the hack has been unable to determine the full extent of the attack.

That's largely the result of the hackers being meticulous, clearing their tracks and leaving very little evidence for investigators to sift through.

Investigators have determined that names, addresses, phone numbers, dates of birth, emergency contact details, tax file numbers, payroll information, bank account details and student academic records were stolen.

The database that was accessed held 19 years' worth of records but the investigators believe only a fraction of the available information was taken.

In getting to the personal information, the hackers bypassed intellectual property and research information.

Investigators believe this information remained untouched.

ANU vice chancellor Brian Schmidt says the cyber attack was extremely "sophisticated".


Who was responsible?


The ANU believes up to 15 people were involved in the hack but says it doesn't have enough evidence to blame any one country and isn't ruling out organised crime.

Vice chancellor Brian Schmidt argued it could be "a whole bunch of countries" behind the attack but a senior analyst with the Australian Strategic Policy Institute thinks there's one obvious culprit.

"It's likely to be China, frankly, they've got strong interests in Australia for a number of different reasons," Tom Uren said.

"We're part of the Five Eyes alliance so there's a relationship with American military and intelligence.
Canberra is the heart of government and there's many students at the ANU that go on to work in government.

"Plus, there's also a lot of Chinese students who come to Australia to study and one theory that's been told to me is that perhaps the Chinese Government wants to keep tabs on what its students in Australia are doing as well."

There is no evidence that the information has been used by criminals for identity fraud to date.

One of the spear phishing emails sent to ANU staff, inviting them to provide support on common issues in the region.
(Supplied: Australian National University)


How did they do it?


On November 9, 2018, the hackers sent an email to a senior staff member at the ANU.

Another staff member, who had access to their colleague's account, previewed the email but never clicked on it.

Read more


Even though the email was deleted, it was too late to stop the hackers, who had already accessed the senior staff member's username, password and calendar.

Once in, the hackers mapped the ANU computer network to get an understanding of how everything was connected.

The second stage of emails included a targeted mailout to 10 people at ANU, inviting them to attend an event at the university.

The hackers also accessed a directory that houses usernames, emails, phone numbers and job titles to better understand people's roles and responsibilities within the university.

As the hackers gained more information, they sent out more emails to ANU accounts, ultimately gaining the username and password of at least one network administrator.

This allowed them to extend the reach of their attack.

Routine maintenance temporarily kicked the hackers out but within weeks they were back in stealing more information.

The hackers were ultimately kicked out on December 21 and future attempts to get back into the network failed.

Kevin Rudd and Marty Natalegawa are among the high-profile politicians who have studied at ANU.
(Supplied: Australian Government)


Why hack ANU?


Based mere kilometres from the Federal Parliament, the ANU has a global reputation as being an institute of choice for future leaders.

The ANU prides itself on being home to the best and brightest — both in its student and academic ranks.

It's the university of choice for an Australian wanting to become a diplomat, and has trained senior leaders that now work for governments and private organisations across the globe.

The ANU is home to the National Security College and prides itself on a large international student community.

Former and present prime ministers and premiers and senior military leaders have studied there, including Bob Hawke, Kevin Rudd, Annastacia Palaszczuk and Barry O'Farrell.

Indonesia's former foreign minister Marty Natalegawa and former New Zealand opposition leader and governor of the Reserve Bank Don Brash studied at ANU.

They represent just the tip of an iceberg of bureaucrats, past and present, now in senior government roles internationally.

Senior analyst Tom Uren says the most likely culprit is China.


Are the details safe now?


This wasn't the first hack on the university but it proved the most damaging and ANU has spent millions upgrading its computer network.

Professor Brian Schmidt said he hoped universities, organisations and individuals would learn from ANU's experience.

A copy of the report has been issued to a university foreign interference taskforce, which aims to provide better protection for universities against foreign interference.

The attack on ANU was possible because of the university's old computer network, rather than the result of a single user not downloading a security upgrade.

Despite ANU's upgrades, the Australian Cyber Security Centre warns a computer network is never 100 per cent secure in the face of a growing industry of hackers keen to steal information.

It wants all Australians, from individuals to organisations, to take the threat seriously and ensure they're adequately protected.



####
document number 14: 
A 1919 Colonial House Finds Renewal in Soft Tones


Clever ideas for a Colonial home kitchen remodel and a newly-created bathroom

When Amanda, a former pastry chef, and Cory, a tech executive, saw their 1919 Yonkers Colonial house for the first time, they were charmed.
They loved everything, down to the kitchen’s dated salmon formica.
But they also knew that after they lived there for a bit, they would be renovating it to suit their family’s needs.
With their son, Herschel, and their cat, Horse P.
Cat, they moved into the 2,600-square-foot home and brainstormed about how to best remodel the kitchen and add a new downstairs bathroom.

To bring their Colonial home remodel to life, they posted their project on Sweeten and hired this Westchester-based contractor.
Sweeten matches home renovation projects with vetted general contractors, offering advice, support, and financial protection—at no cost to the homeowner.


"After" photos by Miao Jiaxin for Sweeten

Guest blog post by Sweeten homeowner Amanda


A charming (but not functional) Colonial home


We had been dividing our time between a farmhouse in Dutchess County and a walk-up apartment in Brooklyn.
When our son was born, neither of these homes was quite suited to us.
We decided to find a place in between with a shorter commute for my husband, more social opportunities for me, and easy access to the home.

When we first saw the house, we were charmed by the time-capsule of a kitchen—salmon formica, dark-wood cabinets, and a dishwasher that predated the other elements.
That said, we knew we would eventually update the kitchen.
Having a lavatory on the ground floor and not having to run upstairs was also on the wishlist.


The existing kitchen had one radiator, which was buried in the back of a custom cabinet.
It was a clever solution at the time, but ate up a lot of cabinet space and wasn’t heat-efficient.
We decided to install a radiant floor heating system that we could run off of our existing hot-water heating system.
A more formal, fully-functional island would offer storage, outlets, and a bigger counter area.


Save



####
document number 15: 
DFA launches ePayment for passport applications


EPAYMENT.
A passport applicant tries out the ePayment portal of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) in Market!
Market!
on June 14, 2018.
Photo courtesy of DFA


MANILA, Philippines – The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) on Thursday, June 14, launched its ePayment portal that requires passport applicants to "pre-pay" their passport processing fees before their appointments at DFA consular offices.

In a press release on Thursday, June 14, Foreign Assistant Secretary Frank Cimafranca said the ePayment system "will initially apply for applications lodged at the DFA Aseana Consular Office" along President Diosdado Macapagal Avenue, Parañaque City, beginning June.

The system "would be rolled out in Metro Manila in July and nationwide by August," Cimafranca said.

"With ePayment, we expect that no-shows in our consular offices will be significantly reduced, if not totally eliminated.
By pre-paying, applicants are encouraged to show up lest they forfeit their passport processing fee," Foreign Secretary Alan Peter Cayetano said.


Cayetano said that without ePayment, only 60-65% of applicants show up for their passport application appointments in DFA consular offices.

When the DFA tested ePayment at DFA Aseana, Cayetano said 94-97% of passport applicants showed up for their appointments.

"Applicants can pay the passport processing fee through any of the following payment centers: Bayad Center; EcPay; Pera Hub; Robinsons Business Center and Department Store; Walter Mart Department Store; 7-Eleven; USCC Western Union; and Villarica Pawnshop.
Other payment centers as well as credit/debit card payment facility will be made available soon," the DFA said.

The agency said the public can access more information about the ePayment portal through this link.
The public can also call the DFA's help desk at (02) 234 3488, or email info@passport.gov.ph.

The DFA also said it was opening 100,000 passport application slots on Thursday, June 14.

Cayetano added that, after this, the DFA would open 10,000 slots from Monday to Saturday, except holidays, such as June 15.
He said that on these days, the DFA would open 5,000 slots at noon and 5,000 more at 9 pm.
– Rappler.com



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = invasion
document number 1: 
The Invasion of Poland in pictures, 1939


View of an undamaged Polish city from the cockpit of a German medium bomber aircraft, likely a Heinkel He 111 P, in 1939.


On September 1, 1939, the world was shocked as Nazi troops invaded Poland.
Tensions soared in Europe, and world leaders recognized that this invasion could be the final straw that would lead to war.
German military leaders had begun planning for war with Poland as early as the mid 1920s.
Recovering the ethnically Polish territory of Pomerania, Poznan, and Silesia, as well as the largely German Free City of Danzig were the major objectives.
Nevertheless, the restrictions of Versailles and Germany’s internal weakness made such plans impossible to realize.

Hitler’s rise to power in 1933 capitalized on German’s desire to regain lost territories, to which Nazi leaders added the goal of destroying an independent Poland.
According to author Alexander Rossino, prior to the war Hitler was at least as anti-Polish as anti-Semitic in his opinions.

After Hitler violated the Munich treaty, Poland was able to extract guarantees of military assistance from France, and significantly, Britain.
In March 1939, Hitler began to make demands on Poland for the return of territory in the Polish Corridor, cessation of Polish rights in Danzig, and annexation of the Free City to Germany.
These Poland categorically rejected.
The war was close.

In 1939, the Polish army still maintained many cavalry squadrons, which had served them well as recently as the Polish-Soviet War in 1921.
A myth emerged about the Polish cavalry leading desperate charges against the tanks of the invading Nazis, pitting horsemen against armored vehicles.
While cavalry units did encounter armored divisions on occasion, their targets were ground infantry, and their charges were often effective.
Nazi and Soviet propaganda helped fuel the myth of the noble-yet-backward Polish cavalry.
This photo is of a Polish cavalry squadron on maneuvers somewhere in Poland, on April 29, 1939.


On paper, Poland’s full mobilized army would have numbered about 2.5 million.
Due to allied pressure and mismanagement, however, only about 600,000 Polish troops were in place to meet the German invasion on September 1, 1939.
These forces were organized into 7 armies and 5 independent operational groups.
The typical Polish infantry division was roughly equal in numbers to its German counterpart, but weaker in terms of anti-tank guns, artillery support, and transport.
Poland had 30 active and 7 reserve divisions.
In addition there were 12 cavalry brigades and one mechanized cavalry brigade.

The Germans were organized in two Army Groups, with a total of 5 armies.
The Germans fielded about 1.8 million troops.
The Germans had 2600 tanks against the Polish 180, and over 2,000 aircraft against the Polish 420.
German forces were supplemented by a Slovak brigade.

German forces invaded Poland from the north, south, and west the morning after the Gleiwitz incident.
Slovak forces advanced alongside the Germans in northern Slovakia.
As the Wehrmacht advanced, Polish forces withdrew from their forward bases of operation close to the Polish–German border to more established lines of defence to the east.
After the mid-September Polish defeat in the Battle of the Bzura, the Germans gained an undisputed advantage.
Polish forces then withdrew to the southeast where they prepared for a long defence of the Romanian Bridgehead and awaited expected support and relief from France and the United Kingdom.
While those two countries had pacts with Poland and had declared war on Germany on 3 September, in the end their aid to Poland was very limited.

The Soviet Red Army’s invasion of Eastern Poland on 17 September, in accordance with a secret protocol of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, rendered the Polish plan of defence obsolete.
Facing a second front, the Polish government concluded the defence of the Romanian Bridgehead was no longer feasible and ordered an emergency evacuation of all troops to neutral Romania.
On 6 October, following the Polish defeat at the Battle of Kock, German and Soviet forces gained full control over Poland.
The success of the invasion marked the end of the Second Polish Republic, though Poland never formally surrendered.

Associated Press correspondent Alvin Steinkopf broadcasting from the Free City of Danzig — at the time, a semi-autonomous city-state tied to Poland.
Steinkopf was relating the tense situation in Danzig back to America, on July 11, 1939.
Germany had been demanding the incorporation of Danzing into the Third Reich for months, and appeared to be preparing military action.


The American journalist John Gunther wrote in December 1939 that "the German campaign was a masterpiece.
Nothing quite like it has been seen in military history".
Despite Poland’s poor leadership and outside assistance, Gunther still claimed that the invasion proved the skill of the German armed forces.
The country was divided between Germany and the Soviet Union.
Slovakia gained back those territories taken by Poland in autumn 1938.
Lithuania received the city of Vilnius and its environs on 28 October 1939 from the Soviet Union.

About 65,000 Polish troops were killed in the fighting, with 420,000 others being captured by the Germans and 240,000 more by the Soviets (for a total of 660,000 prisoners).
Up to 120,000 Polish troops escaped to neutral Romania(through the Romanian Bridgehead and Hungary), and another 20,000 to Latvia and Lithuania, with the majority eventually making their way to France or Britain.
Most of the Polish Navy succeeded in evacuating to Britain as well.
German personnel losses were less than their enemies (c.
16,000 killed).

Soviet premier Josef Stalin (second from right), smiles while Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov (seated), signs the non-aggression pact with German Reich Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop (third from right), in Moscow, on August 23, 1939.
The man at left is Soviet Deputy Defense Minister and Chief of the General Staff, Marshal Boris Shaposhnikov.
The nonaggression pact included a secret protocol dividing eastern Europe into spheres of influence in the event of a conflict.
The pact now guaranteed that Hitler’s troops would face no resistance from the Soviets if they invaded Poland, bringing the war one step closer to reality.


Two days after Germany signed the non-aggression pact with the USSR, Great Britain entered into a military alliance with Poland, on August 25, 1939.
This photo shows the scene one week later, on September 1, 1939, one of the first military operations of Germany’s invasion of Poland, and the beginning of World War II.
Here, the German battleship Schleswig-Holstein is bombing a Polish military transit depot at Westerplatte in the Free City of Danzig.
Simultaneously, the German Air Force (Luftwaffe), and ground troops (Heer) were attacking several other Polish targets.


German soldiers comb the Westerplatte after it was surrendered to German units from the Schleswig-Holstein landing crew, on September 7, 1939.
Fewer than 200 Polish soldiers defended the small peninsula, holding off the Germans for seven days.


Aerial view of bombs exploding during a German bombing run over Poland in September of 1939.


Two tanks of the SS-Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler Division cross the Bzura River during the German invasion of Poland in September of 1939.
The Battle of Bzura, the largest of the entire campaign, lasted more than a week, ending with the German forces capturing most of western Poland.


Soldiers of the SS-Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler Division, resting in a ditch alongside a road on the way to Pabianice, during the invasion of Poland in 1939.


German advance guards and scouts are shown in a Polish town that has been under fire during the Nazi invasion of Poland, September 1939.


German infantry cautiously advance on the outskirts of Warsaw, Poland on September 16, 1939.


Several civilian prisoners of war, with arms raised, walk along a road during the German invasion of Poland in September of 1939.


Britain’s King George VI broadcasts to the British nation on the first evening of the war, on September 3, 1939, in London.


A crowd reads newspaper headlines, "Bombs Rain On Warsaw" as they stand outside the U.S. State Department building where diplomats held a conference on war conditions in Europe, on September 1, 1939.


The scene of devastation seen on Ordynacka Street in Warsaw, Poland on March 6, 1940.
The carcass of a dead horse lies in the street among enormous piles of debris.
While Warsaw was under nearly constant bombardment during the invasion, on one day alone, September 25, 1939, about 1,150 bombing sorties were flown by German aircraft against Warsaw, dropping over 550 tons of high explosive and incendiary bombs on the city.


A damaged Polish armored train carrying tanks captured by the 14th SS-Leibstandard Adolf Hitler Division, near Blonie, during the invasion of Poland in September of 1939.


German soldiers, taken prisoner by the Polish army during the Nazi invasion, are shown while they were held captive in Warsaw, on October 2, 1939.


A young Polish boy returns to what was his home and squats among the ruins during a pause in the German air raids on Warsaw, Poland, in September of 1939.
German attacks lasted until Warsaw surrendered on September 28.
One week later, the last of the Polish forces capitulated near Lublin, giving full control of Poland to Germany and the Soviet Union.


Adolf Hitler salutes parading troops of the German Wehrmacht in Warsaw, Poland, on October 5, 1939 after the German invasion.
Behind Hitler are, from left to right: Colonel General Walther von Brauchitsch, Lieutenant General Friedrich von Cochenhausen, Colonel General Gerd von Rundstedt, and Colonel General Wilhelm Keitel.

(Photo credit: Bundesarchiv / AP).



####
document number 2: 
U.S.-led attack on Afghanistan begins


On October 7, 2001, a U.S.-led coalition begins attacks on Taliban-controlled Afghanistan with an intense bombing campaign by American and British forces.
Logistical support was provided by other nations including France, Germany, Australia and Canada and, later, troops were provided by the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance rebels.
The invasion of Afghanistan was the opening salvo in the United States "war on terrorism" and a response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, D.C.

Dubbed "Operation Enduring Freedom" in U.S. military parlance, the invasion of Afghanistan was intended to target terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden’s al-Qaida organization, which was based in the country, as well as the extreme fundamentalist Taliban government that had ruled most of the country since 1996 and supported and protected al-Qaida.
The Taliban, which had imposed its extremist version of Islam on the entire country, also perpetrated countless human rights abuses against its people, especially women, girls and ethnic Hazaras.
During their rule, large numbers of Afghans lived in utter poverty, and as many as 4 million Afghans are thought to have suffered from starvation.

In the weeks prior to the invasion, both the United States and the U.N. Security Council had demanded that the Taliban turn over Osama bin Laden for prosecution.
After deeming the Taliban’s counteroffers unsatisfactory—among them to try bin Laden in an Islamic court—the invasion began with an aerial bombardment of Taliban and al-Qaida installations in Kabul, Kandahar, Jalalabad, Konduz and Mazar-e-Sharif.
Other coalition planes flew in airdrops of humanitarian supplies for Afghan civilians.
The Taliban called the actions "an attack on Islam."
In a taped statement released to the Arabic al-Jazeera television network, Osama bin Laden called for a war against the entire non-Muslim world.

After the air campaign softened Taliban defenses, the coalition began a ground invasion, with Northern Alliance forces providing most of the troops and the U.S. and other nations giving air and ground support.
On November 12, a little over a month after the military action began, Taliban officials and their forces retreated from the capital of Kabul.
By early December, Kandahar, the last Taliban stronghold, had fallen and Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar went into hiding rather than surrender.
Al-Qaida fighters continued to hide out in Afghanistan’s mountainous Tora Bora region, where they were engaged by anti-Taliban Afghan forces, backed by U.S. Special Forces troops.
Al-Qaida soon initiated a truce, which is now believed to have been a ploy to allow Osama bin Laden and other key al-Qaida members time to escape into neighboring Pakistan.
By mid-December, the bunker and cave complex used by al-Qaida at Tora Bora had been captured, but there was no sign of bin Laden.

After Tora Bora, a grand council of Afghan tribal leaders and former exiles was convened under the leadership of Hamid Karzai, who first served as interim leader before becoming the first democratically elected president of Afghanistan on December 7, 2004.
Even as Afghanistan began to take the first steps toward democracy, however, with more than 10,000 U.S. troops in country, al-Qaida and Taliban forces began to regroup in the mountainous border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
They continue to engage U.S. and Afghan troops in guerilla-style warfare and have also been responsible for the deaths of elected government officials and aid workers and the kidnapping of foreigners.
Hundreds of American and coalition soldiers and thousands of Afghans have been killed and wounded in the fighting.

Afghans continue to make up the largest refugee population in the world, though nearly 3 million have returned to Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban, further straining the country’s war-ravaged economy.



####
document number 3: 
The 1989 Invasion of Panama


Urban combat in Panama, 1989.


On December 20th, 1989, President Bush launched a military operation code-named "Operation Just Cause" to topple the dictatorial government of Manuel Noriega in Panama.
The invasion involved about 24,000 US troops who had orders to oust the leader and execute a warrant for his arrest on drug trafficking charges.
The US forces had the backing of well-equipped military hardware.
The military campaign was rather short as it lasted for only two months, beginning on December 20, 1989 and ended on January 31, 1990.

5.
Background


In the 1980s, Panama was a country of great significance to the US mainly due to the presence of the Panama Canal, a critical shipping route for American ships.
The Panama Canal, which had been constructed primarily by the US government, was partially under the control of the Panama government with a plan for it to be fully handed over to the Latin American country by the year 2000.
The small nation also hosted several US military bases which were strategic during the America-Russia Cold War because of Panama's relative proximity to Cuba.
The country’s president at the time was Manuel Noriega who had notably previously served as a paid informant for the Central Intelligence Agency and was of great help in the international war on the drug trade.
Noriega had facilitated the movement of weapons into Latin America in an effort to arm pro-western forces in the time of the Cold War.
George H. W. Bush has been at the head of CIA from 1976 – 1977.
Noriega had sided with the US and not the Soviet Union in Latin America.
He received more than $100,000 annually from the 1960s up to 1980s, when it was increased to $20,000.

Noriega worked closely with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to curb the illegal drug shipments.
On the other hand, he also received financial support from drug dealers and facilitated laundering drug money, because he had a special relationship with the CIA and could not be investigated by DEA.
In the 1980s, the relationship between Noriega and the US was deteriorating.
In 1986, Ronald Reagan opened negotiations urging Noriega to step down as he had been exposed publicly by the New York Times for his involvement with the illicit drug trade.
Noriega was pressured and indicted on several drug-related charges in US courts.
In 1988, a US invasion was planned, but President Reagan refused because the ties Noriega had with Bush as head of CIA, which could potentially affect Bush’s presidential campaign.
In later negotiations, the charges of drug trafficking were dropped.
In March 1988, Noriega’s forces resisted the coup attempt to topple the Panamanian government.
As the relations deteriorated further, Noriega shifted allegiance to the Soviet bloc where he received military aid from Libya, Nicaragua, and Cuba.
The US military planners started preparing plans to invade Panama.
In May 1989, Panama conducted its general elections where Noriega’s primary opponents gained majority votes only to have the government reject the results and cling to power.
Then on December 16, 1989 a convoy of US military personnel was attacked in the nation’s capital prompting President Bush to order the commencing of Operation Just Cause.

4.
Makeup


The US military was deployed to the tiny country and comprised of units from the US Army, US Air Force, The US Navy, and The US Marines.
The Panamanian Defense Forces had only 16,000 officers.
The operation involved 27,684 US troops and more than 300 aircraft, which included the C-130 Hercules tactical which was equipped with Adverse Weather Aerial Delivery System (AWADS), AC-130 Spectre gunship, C-141 Starlifter, OA-37B dragonfly observation and attack aircraft, C-5 Galaxy strategic transport, AH-64 Apache attack helicopter, and other specialized military aircraft.
Air logistics was given by the 22nd Air Force and air assistance from the 60th, 62nd, and 63rd military airlift wings.
The Panama incursion was the first combat for the AH-64 and the F-117.

3.
Description


The US military invasion began on 20th, December 1989 at 1:00 am local time.
The first course of action was to destroy all strategic installations including the Punta Paitilla Airport, Army garrisons and jamming the Panamanian radar units using EF-111As of 266th TFW and 390th ECS.
Several air assaults were critical in the capture of significant towns and cities with the deployment of paratroopers.
There were some scattered from Panamanian Defense Force (PDF).
By December 24, the PDCF had been crushed, and the US forces held most of the country.
With defeat being evident, President Noriega sought refuge in a Vatican diplomatic mission in the capital city.
However, the US forces used psychological strategies to flush him out and capture him by playing loud rock music at the diplomatic residence.
Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990 when he was captured and then flown to the US.

2.
Outcome


The war had a duration of two months and resulted in many casualties with some organizations reporting deaths of over 3,000 Panamanian civilians.
Both warring sides lost military officers with the US reporting 23 deaths from its forces and three civilians, while the Panama Defense Forces reported 150 deaths and 500 civilians.
The war also displaced many from their homes, resulting in thousands of refugees.
The European Parliament and the Organization of American States made a formal protest against the invasion and condemned it as a blatant violation of international law.
In 1992, Noriega was charged on eight counts of money laundering, racketeering, and drug trafficking.
He was found guilty and sentenced to 40 years in a federal prison, although later it was reduced to 30 years.

1.
Significance


The Invasion of Panama is considered by scholars as a precursor to the Gulf War where the US government showed the world its military capacity.
The war, while relatively short, strained diplomatic relations between the US and several Latin American nations with Peru recalling its ambassador from the US in protest.
Noriega’s case became the very first in the Jury’s history where a foreign leader was convicted of criminal charges.



####
document number 4: 
Arrival of UAE-backed forces stokes tensions on Yemen's Socotra


Protesters in Socotra on Thursday demonstrate against the Islah party who they say have stoked anti-UAE sentiment (Twitter)


The arrival last week of hundreds of UAE-backed Yemeni forces on Socotra has fuelled protests and further divided residents of the small island.

On one side are those, including the island's governor, Ramzi Mahroos, who say the forces are part of a broader Emirati effort to occupy the island, located in one of the world's busiest shipping lanes.

On the other side are locals who point to the food aid and investment in infrastructure that the UAE has provided, and say al-Islah, the Yemeni branch of the Muslim Brotherhood, is stoking anti-UAE sentiment.


Over the past year, tensions have been sparked between the UAE and Saudi Arabia, which leads the coalition including the Emiratis that intervened in the war in 2015, over which will dominate Socotra.

Now the dynamics from southern Yemen, where the al-Islah party, backed by Yemen's exiled president Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi, wrestle against the UAE-backed Security Belt Forces are spilling onto the island.

The latest tensions kicked off last week after the deployment of the new batch of UAE-trained Yemeni forces to an Emirati military camp on the island.
Following their arrival, there were clashes between the UAE-backed forces and those aligned with Hadi.

On Sunday, hundreds of demonstrators marched through Hadibu, the island’s capital, chanting slogans against the Emirati militias and in support of the Yemeni government.

'The government did not help Socotra with anything during the last years and only UAE did'

- Mubarak, Socotra resident



Protesters say they see the continuing Emirati presence on the 80-mile long island, with a population of around 60,000, as an invasion without any connection to the war.

"Socotra is the Yemeni island that did not witness any fighting, so there is no need for military presence inside it," said Mohammed al-Mizraqi, a local who participated in Sunday’s protests.
"Socotra never witnessed any presence of military forces like nowadays.

"The Houthis did not invade Socotra but the Emiratis did - so we will oppose this invasion with all kinds of resistance until we liberate our island from the new invaders."

But other residents point to the money that the UAE has invested in infrastructure and disaster relief since its arrival.

"The UAE builds hospitals, schools and helped needy people with food and money.
The Emiratis helped the victims of the Monaco hurricane, so how can we demand them to go?"
Mubarak, another resident, told MEE earlier this week.

"The government did not help Socotra with anything during the last years and only the UAE did, so I hope that protests next time take to the streets against the Islah party because they encourage residents to protest against the Emirates."

Sure enough, on Thursday, there were fresh demonstrations against Islah as those in support of the UAE accused the party, with whom the island's governor is aligned, of creating chaos.

Island invasion?


The UAE first deployed fighters to Socotra last April.
Until then, the island had been free of the fighting that raged on mainland Yemen.

UAE forces now oversee the island’s airport and seaport, meaning that no one can enter the island until they are inspected by Emirati-backed forces.

'The Houthis did not invade Socotra but the Emiratis did so we will oppose this invasion with all kinds of resistance'

- Mohammed al-Mizraqi, Socotra resident



A source in the governor’s office who spoke on condition of anonymity said it was true that the UAE had helped residents, but that it was only part of a strategy to maintain its grip on the island.

"This is what invaders usually do to gain the support of people but only educated people know this is the first step of invasion," he said.

One major objection, he said, is that the UAE is using Yemeni forces, so if clashes break out, they are between Yemenis, while the Emiratis continue to gain territory from a safe distance.

Pushing the Emiratis out with force is impossible, he said.
"So we hope that our leadership can reach an agreement to liberate us from the UAE."

Seasoned Yemeni journalist Mohammed Ali told MEE that the Emirati strategy in Socotra is similar to how it has behaved in other parts of the country: it is willing to lose money in an effort to secure strategic territory, but not men, he said.

"The UAE is not willing to lose more soldiers either in Socotra or in any other province, so they train Yemeni fighters and ask them to implement the UAE’s agenda," Ali said.

"The UAE has imposed Security Belt Forces in Aden so no one can oppose them easily there and today they repeat the same scenario in Socotra and no one will oppose them in Socotra."

The arrival of the new UAE-backed forces comes as Western diplomats have said that the Emiratis are pulling their own troops and equipment from the southern port of Aden and Yemen’s western coast, concerned over rising US-Iran tensions in the Gulf.

The Emiratis have not commented on the apparent drawdown.



####
document number 5: 
Turkey Begins Invasion of Syria, Targeting US-Allied Kurds


NATO member Turkey's military has begun an invasion of areas of northeastern Syria evacuated by U.S. troops, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Wednesday.
The operation is aimed at mostly-Kurdish forces partnered with the U.S.

In a tweet, Erdogan said his military "just launched Operation Peace Spring against PKK/YPG and Daesh terrorists in northern Syria."

"Our mission is to prevent the creation of a terror corridor across our southern border, and to bring peace to the area," Erdogan added.

The main fighting force of the U.S.-allied Syrian Democratic Forces is the YPG (People's Protection Units).
Erdogan claims that the YPG has links to the PKK (Kurdistan Workers Party), a group in eastern Turkey labeled a terrorist organization by Turkey and the U.S.

Daesh is an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, or ISIS.

Earlier, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that there had been shelling around the northeastern Syrian border town of Ras al-Ayn.

Turkey's military operation has faced open opposition from the U.S. military, which on Monday announced that Turkey had been cut off from access to the Combined Air Operations Center (CAOC), depriving Turkey's air forces of surveillance intelligence.

However, an Oct.
6 White House announcement, followed by a series of Tweets from President Donald Trump, stated that the estimated 50 U.S. troops in northeastern Syria were being withdrawn to avoid the potential for a clash with the invading Turks.

Trump also restated his intention to withdraw all of the estimated 1,000 U.S. troops remaining in Syria, but gave no timeline.

The SDF has described the U.S. withdrawal as a "stab in the back" to a loyal ally that suffered an estimated 11,000 casualties in the long campaign that drove ISIS from its last territorial strongholds.

In statements, the SDF also vowed to "defend our land at all costs."

CNN reported from the scene in northeastern Syria that civilians were clogging roads as they fled south to avoid Turkish airstrikes.

From the Turkish town of Akcakale on the Syrian border, across from the flashpoint Syrian town of Tal Abyad, the Associated Press reported that the Turkish airstrikes were hitting Ras al-Ayn.

Akcakale had previously been the site of a joint operations center for U.S. and Turkish troops in coordinating joint air and ground patrols in northeastern Syria, an effort to ease Turkish concerns about the presence of the SDF.

Only last week, Defense Secretary Mark Esper referred to Akcakale in remarks to reporters traveling with him and expressed his hopes for the continuation of the joint patrols.

The Defense Department had also posted photos of SDF fighters withdrawing from the area and dismantling fortifications.

Before Erdogan's announcement, Trump sent out a tweet restating his position that the U.S. had become bogged down at immense cost in pointless and never-ending wars in the Mideast, and U.S. troops should be brought home.

"Fighting between various groups that has been going on for hundreds of years," Trump said.
"USA should never have been in Middle East.
Moved our 50 soldiers out.
Turkey MUST take over captured ISIS fighters that Europe refused to have returned.
The stupid endless wars, for us, are ending!"

Trump's order to withdraw U.S. troops has faced harsh criticism from his closest Republican allies in Congress, including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky, and from retired military officers who have normally been supportive.

On Fox News Tuesday night, retired Army Gen.
Jack Keane, the former Army vice chief of staff, said that the U.S. essentially clearing the way for a Turkish invasion was "a recipe for disaster."

Trump has threatened to "obliterate" Turkey's economy unless the Turkish military uses restraint but Keane said "I don't know any military incursion that wouldn't do harm."

One of the main fears expressed by critics of the withdrawal is that the SDF would abandon the camps where they guard thousands of captured ISIS prisoners.
The SDF fighters "are not going to stay guarding detainees" as they turn to face the Turks, Keane said.

In his tweet announcement, Erdogan said the Turkish military was joined by the Syrian National Army, formerly known as the Free Syrian Army, an irregular force once backed and supplied by the U.S. before splitting with the SDF.

Erdogan has also previously made clear that one of the main objectives of a Turkish invasion would be to create a "safe zone" 20 miles deep and 300 miles wide east of the Euphrates River stretching to the Iraqi border where about two million Syrian refugees now in Turkey could be sent.

-- Richard Sisk can be reached at richard.sisk@military.com.


© Copyright 2020 Military.com.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.



####
document number 6: 
The 2017 Invasion of The Gambia






####
document number 7: 
Noam Chomsky signs call to boycott Turkey and prevent the ethnic cleansing of Kurdish people


Noam Chomsky, David Graeber, and Brian Eno have joined hundreds of academics and artists around the world to sign an academic and cultural call to boycott Turkey.
The call asks for:

academics, artists and intellectuals around the world to oppose the Turkish invasion of north-eastern Syria [Rojava] by boycotting Turkish government sponsored academic, artistic and musical events taking place inside and outside of Turkey.


"Rojava is a beacon of hope for the peoples of the world"


Graeber, an author and academic, told

The Canary

why he supports this call to boycott Turkey:

Rojava is a beacon of hope for the peoples of the world, currently being faced by the prospect of outright genocide.
Its the responsibility of decent human beings everywhere to understand that neutrality is not an option.


Academics and artists called for a boycott of Turkish state-funded universities.
According to Boycott Turkey:

Turkey’s academic institutions are deeply enmeshed with Turkish capitalism and the military industrial complex.
Many universities act as incubators for Turkish military technology, making the arms companies richer, and strengthening the state’s oppressive militarism.


They also asked universities around the world to boycott partnerships with Turkish state-funded institutions.
The signatories ask that organisations reject Turkish state funding for cultural events such as film festivals.

Ethnic cleansing


Turkey’s invasion of the majority-Kurdish autonomous region of north-eastern Syria (known as Rojava) began on the 9 October.
Turkish-backed jihadist groups have also crossed the border and carried out killing sprees.
A brief ceasefire was declared on 17 October, but Turkey has continued to fire on Rojava and carry out drone strikes regardless.

The boycott call argues that:

Turkish President R.
T. Erdoğan has stated explicitly and repeatedly that it is his intention to militarily ethnically cleanse the Kurdish population of over one million people that live in an arc across the Turkish border from Kobane to Derik and to replace that population with members of different ethnic groups.


Targeting academics


The Turkish state has heavily cracked down on academics who have spoken out against the government.
In 2016, over two-thousand academics working in Turkey signed a declaration calling on Turkey to end its war on Kurdish people.
These Academics For Peace have been severely punished by the state and by state universities.
Hundreds lost their jobs, while around 790 are being prosecuted and are facing trial.

Pressure your university


Universities around the world also have ties with companies linked to the Turkish state.
Students and academics can pressure their universities to end collaborations with these Turkish companies.

For example, Turkish arms company Aselsan has partnerships with Bristol university in the UK, with Fraunhofer Institute in Germany, and with Boston University in the US.
Aselsan is majority-owned by the Turkish Armed Forces Foundation, whose chairman is president Erdoğan.
Aselsan’s weapons are used in Turkey’s ethnic cleansing of Kurdish people.

Aselsan also has collaborations with 29 universities in Turkey.
Academics could pressure universities worldwide to end all collaborations with Aselsan’s partner universities in Turkey.

Wider boycott


The academic call is just one way that people can boycott Turkey.
There are many other ways that people can take action.
For example, don’t book your package holiday in Turkey.
And don’t fly with Turkish Airlines, which is half-owned by the state.
You can boycott specific Turkish brands such as Beko, or you can protest against the many arms companies which supply weapons to Turkey.

Take action and stand with the people of Rojava.
Boycott Turkey.

Featured image via screengrab



####
document number 8: 
Military analysis of the American cruise missile attack on Syria



US fires Tomahawk cruise missiles into Syria in retaliation ... - hindustantimes.com


The military aspects of the attack can be termed a limited success.
It is now confirmed that only 23 cruise missiles hit the target.
One reason for this could be that only certain areas were targeted where there were no Russians.
Syria itself is a puny power, and the attack met with no resistance.
But in future, the Russians could give anti-ship missiles to Syria to bolster their defense.
In such a scenario a couple of anti-ship missiles fired and hitting the US destroyers could lead to over 1500 deaths.
This would set the stage for a confrontation with Russia.
An escalation would then be a certainty.

The threat by the US to launch more missile attacks show that Trump has for the moment, shelved the battle against the ISIS.
This was expected as the President is an impetuous man with little experience.

Surrender to Hawks


There are many hawks led by Senator McCain and his ilk who have hailed the airstrike on the Syrian airfield.
They have asked for more attacks, and now the US says that no peace is possible in Syria without the removal of Assad.
With the Russians and Iranians backing Assad, the stage is set for a confrontation.
War is an extension of the political aim.
Keeping this in mind, the attack by Trump is, in reality, an attack on Russia.
Despite all talk, it is clear that the target is Russia and its support for Assad.

The attack


The attack itself did a lot of damage.

But to completely degrade the airfield for operations, more attacks will be needed.
The Syrian aircraft took off again in just a few hours after the assault to bomb the ISIS targets.
In case the US were to follow up with further attacks, the chance of an escalation are bright.
There will be a reaction as per Newton's laws of motion.

Every action has a reaction.
The US forces in Syria will now be at greater risk.
The attack without waiting for an independent confirmation as to who uses the gas weapons is reminiscent of the build-up to the invasion of Iraq and Vietnam.
Similarly, at that time the US Presidents upped the ante leading to thousands of American young men being killed.

The objectives were not achieved.

The attack has opened a Pandora's box, and Trump cannot back off, as it would be a loss of face.
He has to shift the focus away from fighting the ISIS to Assad and Russia.
In such a scenario if the US destroyers are hit a nuclear conflagration cannot be ruled out.
Obama now appears a much saner president than Trump who is chasing glory as a "great president."
He may well end up as the man who started the nuclear war.



####
document number 9: 
CENTCOM commander releases video of raid on Baghdadi compound, which now looks like a ‘parking lot with large potholes'


Pentagon releases footage from al-Baghdadi raid


Pentagon releases footage from al-Baghdadi raidThe Pentagon released declassified footage of the U.S. special forces raid that killed the leader of ISIS, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
The footage shows a team of trVolume 0%Press shift question mark to access a list of keyboard shortcutsKeyboard ShortcutsPlay/PauseSPACEIncrease Volume↑Decrease Volume↓Seek Forward→Seek Backward←Captions On/OffcFullscreen/Exit FullscreenfMute/UnmutemSeek %0-9180p270p720pAAC Audio1080p360p540pLive00:0001:1701:17This video file cannot be played.
(Error Code: 224003)

The Pentagon released declassified footage of the U.S. special operations forces raid that killed the leader of ISIS, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
The footage shows a squad of troops approach the compound where the terrorist leader was hiding, a close-air support strike that hits presumed ISIS fighters, and a precision strike that destroys the compound.
(Dept.
of Defense)


Marine Gen.
Kenneth F.
McKenzie Jr., the commander of U.S. Central Command, told reporters Wednesday at the Pentagon that following the raid that bagged Islamic State Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi U.S. forces leveled his compound with standoff munitions.

The compound — located about 4 miles from the Turkish border near Syria’s Idlib province — now "looks pretty much like a parking lot with large potholes," McKenzie said.

When asked if the withdrawal of troops from northeast Syria ordered by President Donald Trump ahead of Turkey’s invasion negatively impacted the mission, McKenzie responded with a resounding "absolutely not.

"We chose the time based on a variety of factors, weather, certainty, lunar data, a variety of things," he said.
"And while might have been convenient to use bases there, the United States military has the capability to go almost anywhere and support ourselves, even at great distances, so that was not a limiting factor.
We struck because the time was about right to do it then, given the totality of the intelligence, and the other factors that would affect the raid force going in and coming out."

Turkey launched an invasion Oct.
9 because it wanted to drive the U.S.-allied Kurdish forces out of a "safe zone" along the border, after U.S. President Donald Trump pulled American troops from the area.

The Pentagon released on Wednesday the first series of images and video of the raid that killed al-Baghdadi.

A side-by-side comparison of the al-Baghdadi compound before and after the raid.
No collateral damage to adjacent structures Oct.
26, 2019.
(DoD)



On Saturday, U.S. forces launched a brazen nighttime heliborne raid to capture or kill the founder and leader of ISIS, who McKenzie described as a "priority target" for U.S. Central Command.
McKenzie said after briefing Trump the previous day, he gave the command from his headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa to commence the mission.

McKenzie said the U.S. contacted military officials in Russia and Turkey to assure deconfliction.

The raid force comprised of U.S. special operators pre-staged at a base in Syria before launching on the mission, according to McKenzie.
The CENTCOM commander did not elaborate how the raid force was moved to the Syrian base, but did say the operation was "far more complex" than what has been briefed.

The "complex" operation to capture or kill the elusive ISIS leader involved fourth- and fifth-generation aircraft, drones and attack helicopters, McKenzie said.

U.S. operators also swooped in on CH-47 Chinook helicopters as they flew low towards the target site.

One video shows American helicopter gunships engaging fighters near the objective who McKenzie said displayed hostile intent towards U.S. forces during the assault.


As the assault force arrived to the compound suspected of housing al-Baghdadi, fighters from two locations near the objective fired on U.S. aircraft, according to McKenzie.
U.S. forces engaged and killed the fighters with two airstrikes.

McKenzie said he did not believe the fighters belonged to al-Baghdadi.
There were other militant groups in the area and may not have known al-Baghdadi was staying in the compound, McKenzie said.

Some of those fighters began to move towards U.S. forces as the assault force approached the target site, potentially not knowing if the forces were part of a Turkish or U.S. military operation, McKenzie said.

A white van that displayed hostile intent was also engaged by U.S. forces, but McKenzie could not confirm how many fighters were killed.


Once on the objective, American commandos conducted tactical call outs and urged people to come out peacefully.
"Every effort was made to avoid civilian casualties," McKenzie told reporters Wednesday.

U.S. forces did engage and kill five hostile ISIS members — four women and one man — in the compound, according to McKenzie.

There was a belief that the compound contained tunnels, said McKenzie.

That belief was confirmed by interrogation of people at the site, plus a "variety of things I can’t go into, including the military working dogs, that are very good at scenting humans and going after them when they are not immediately obvious."

Al-Baghdadi crawled into a tunnel, eventually detonating a suicide vest that killed himself and two children with him.
He may have fired his weapon out of the hole before he died, McKenzie said.

The ISIS leader’s demise brings the total number of ISIS fighters killed during the operation to six.

McKenzie could not confirm President Donald Trump’s claim that the ISIS leader died whimpering and crying in his final moments, but he did say al-Baghdadi crawled himself into a hole, bringing two children with him.

A military working dog who chased down the ISIS leader was wounded after the explosion.
McKenzie said the dog was hurt from exposed live electrical wires in the aftermath of the detonation.

According to the CENTCOM commander, the SOCOM dog is a four-year veteran of special operations who has conducted 50 combat missions.


U.S. special operators cleared the debris from the tunnel and gathered al-Baghdadi’s remains and brought them back to the staging base.

Defense Intelligence Agency conducted a DNA test using a sample from when al-Baghdadi was a prisoner at the Camp Bucca detention facility in Iraq in 2004, according to McKenzie.
The results were a "direct match," McKenzie said.

McKenzie said that CENTCOM has "no illusions" that the death of al-Baghdadi means that the group is completely defeated.
He said the group will take time to reestablish itself and will likely be "disjointed."

But McKenzie expects ISIS may try to conduct a retribution attack, which U.S. forces are postured and ready to respond to.

When asked who would get the $25 million reward that had been placed on Baghdadi, McKenzie said he didn’t know.

"That’s going to go to the dog," joked Pentagon spokesman Jonathan Rath Hoffman.

Al-Baghdadi’s remains were buried at sea within 24 hours of his death, McKenzie said.

The Pentagon released footage of the raid that killed Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi



####
document number 10: 
United Arab Emirates invades Yemeni island



The Yemeni civil war has divided the country and threatened to starve millions of civilians.
- [Ali Zifan / Wikimedia Commons]


As the Yemeni civil war rages on, causing the deaths of thousands of civilians, the regional powers further enrich themselves at Yemen's expense.
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has invaded the island with a full military presence and raised their flag atop most military and government structures.
To avoid the language of war, they claim that Yemen granted them a 99-year lease, though the UAE has shown no paperwork and Yemen has denied the lease.
Previously, the UAE had supported the Yemeni government.
Reports by J Post and the Washington Post provided many of the details used in this article.

Socotra


Socotra is an island off the coast of Yemen that was a part of the domain of the empowered sultanate in mainland Yemen under British colonial rule.
When Yemen gained freedom in 1967, they retained control of the island, giving them a powerful position in the Gulf of Aden, a main trading route for the Middle East.
The island was relatively underdeveloped compared to the rest of the Middle East, but so was mainland Yemen.
Iran, a foe of Saudi Arabia and other nearby Sunni states, began funding projects on the island, such as the Socotra Airport strip in 2003.
In response, in 2008 Saudi businessmen visited the island looking for counter investment opportunities.
Residential communities, hospitals, and other vital non-trade infrastructure were built by Sunni investors, increasing their soft power significantly.

When the Yemeni civil war broke out the island was unaffected.
There are no Huthi rebels on the island and little to no fighting has occurred.
In 2017, the governor of the island took his chance to align the island with the major regional powers and back their new government in Yemen, the Southern Transitional Council (STC), lending them political credibility.

Despite his cooperation, the UAE seems to have invaded the island under false pretenses.

Invasion


The UAE has moved 300 troops, armored vehicles, and logistical support, including communications and flight equipment, onto the island under false pretenses.
They claim they were granted a 99-year lease, though there is no evidence of negotiations or a finalized deal.

Because the governor is under the political rule of the STC, the STC has the final say in any land-leases and has denied authorizing one.
The UAE is a major backer of the STC and legally procuring a lease might be easier than this, but the STC was taken by surprise, meaning it's possible that the UAE's intentions are to operate outside the law.

The UAE has also been conducting a mass public image campaign on the island since the start of the conflict.
Throughout the war, the UAE has guaranteed food security to the island, while the UAE's partner on the mainland, Saudi Arabia, purposefully starved civilian populations.
In addition to taking over the major infrastructure of the island, the UAE has been flying civilians to the UAE for medical treatments and providing education to the children in the absence of a Yemeni central government.

The plan is malicious, taking advantage of a civil war the UAE is fueling in an attempt to annex sovereign, wealth-generating land from an impoverished nation.



####
document number 11: 
The deep roots of the Belize-Guatemala territorial dispute



The roots of Guatemala’s claim on Belize go back as far as the 17

th

century, but the dispute has taken many twists and turns during Belize’s periods under colonial control and as an independent state.
Today, the domestic political realities of both countries could allow the International Court of Justice to reach a definitive decision, finally bringing this longstanding dispute to a close, writes

Victor Bulmer-Thomas (Chatham House).

The people of Belize will soon take part in a referendum to decide whether or not the country should go to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) to resolve Guatemala’s longstanding claim on Belizean territory and waters.

Will this generation be the first to grow up with settled borders in Belize?
(Ronald Plett, CC0)


Since Guatemalans have already voted in favour of going to the ICJ with a huge 95 per cent majority, it would be easy to assume that most Belizeans would wish to do the same.
In Belize, however, the referendum has proven to be a divisive issue, splitting political parties and even families, with the final result likely to be close.

A last-minute legal challenge by opposition parties has led to the referendum being put on hold, but the government remains confident that the poll will go ahead within a matter of weeks.

The deep roots of the Belize-Guatemala territorial dispute


The ultimate origins of the territorial dispute between Belize and Guatemala lie in the 17th century, when British settlers and their slaves came to the coasts of Central America to cut logwood (a dyewood from which fabulous profits were being made at the time).

The Spanish Crown considered these intruders to be mere pirates, and the British Crown at first did nothing to protect them.
It was not until 1763 that Spain, as part of the Treaty of Paris, reluctantly gave these "Baymen" the right to cut logwood within a small area that remained subject to Spanish sovereignty.

These rights were modestly extended by treaty in 1783 and 1786, when the boundaries of what had since become an official British settlement were agreed.
A resident British Superintendent was also dispatched to ensure that the settlers complied with their legal obligations.

This did not stop Spain trying to dislodge the settlers in times of war, however, and the last attempt was in 1798.
Despite having defeated the Spanish forces involved, Great Britain continued to regard Spain as the sovereign power.
In fact, this recognition continued even two decades after the collapse of the Spanish Empire in Central America and Mexico in 1821.

The evolution of Belize-Guatemala relations from British rule to independence


Having become independent from Spain in 1821 and from Mexico in 1823, Central America went on to function as a federation until 1838, at which point it splintered into five separate republics (one of which was Guatemala).

The Belizean territory in dispute today (Janitoalevic, CC BY-SA 4.0)


By this time, the Baymen – with the connivance of the Superintendent – had pushed the boundaries of their settlement far south of the limits agreed with Spain in 1786.
As soon, therefore, as Great Britain had won grudging acceptance from the United States that the "Settlement in the Bay of Honduras" did not challenge the Monroe Doctrine, she pushed Guatemala to sign a boundary treaty based on effective occupation.
The resulting Anglo-Guatemalan Treaty was ratified by both sides in 1859, with the country coming to be known as the colony of British Honduras in 1862 (the name was changed to Belize in 1973).

This should have been the end of the matter.
However, Article 7 of the treaty called for the construction by both parties of a means of communication from the highlands of Guatemala to the Caribbean coast.
Due to the ambiguity of the article, an Additional Convention was signed in 1863 making clear that the British government agreed to pay £50,000 towards the cost of a road or "other line of communication".
Guatemala, however, was unable to ratify the Convention by the agreed date and the British government refused to allow an extension.
The Convention therefore lapsed.

Despite this, the two sides continued to regard the 1859 treaty as valid and even made efforts to demarcate the shared boundaries at various points over the next eighty years.
However, in 1939 the Guatemalan government unilaterally abrogated the treaty on the grounds that the United Kingdom (UK) was in breach of Article 7.
A threat of invasion followed, and a British military presence was established.
Diplomatic efforts to find a solution were then pursued between Guatemala and the UK, with Belizean politicians becoming involved from 1961 onwards.

Ultimately, however, these efforts proved futile, and Belize became independent in 1981 with the dispute unresolved.
And despite independence, the UK continued to keep troops in Belize as part of a defence guarantee, whereas Guatemala continued to claim the territory.

Guatemala finally recognised the independent state of Belize in 1991, and the British defence guarantee soon ended.
However, Guatemala subsequently made clear that, while she recognised the independence of Belize, she did not accept its boundaries.

Turning to the International Court of Justice


This deeply unsatisfactory state of affairs persisted for nearly two decades and despite many rounds of bilateral negotiations.
Finally, in 2008, the two sides reached a Special Agreement under which they undertook to resolve the dispute via the ICJ.

Because ICJ decisions cannot be appealed, implementation of the Special Agreement has been arduous (Jeroen Bouman, CC0)


That it has taken so long to implement the agreement may seem surprising, but this owes to the fact that ICJ decisions cannot be appealed.
Accordingly, constitutional obstacles needed to be overcome, and the electorates of both sides had to be prepared for referendums to authorise resort to the ICJ.

The Guatemalan side, it would seem, prepared well.
Although the turnout in Guatemala in 2018 was only 25 per cent, this was not low by Guatemalan standards, and some 95 per cent voted in favour.
In Belize, by contrast, the result is likely to be very close, with opinion polls consistently giving a majority to opponents of going to the ICJ.

These opponents argue that Belize already has secure boundaries recognised in the constitution and does not need foreign judges to confirm them, let alone change them.
Yet many Belizeans are also aware that without an ICJ ruling their government is likely to continue to allow Guatemalans to cross the border at will.
International allies of Belize might also become less supportive in future if Belizeans throw away this chance to resolve the issue once and for all.

The referendum result and a possible resolution via the ICJ


Despite the opinion polls, there will probably be a small majority in favour of going to the ICJ.
Many opponents of the move have not registered or will not vote due to their alienation from a political system widely considered corrupt.
The opposition People’s United Party (PUP), which has called on its supporters to vote no, also needs to conserve its funds as a general election is likely to be called soon.
By contrast, the ruling United Democratic Party (UDP) has argued strongly for a "yes" vote and will be able to mobilise its supporters to turn out in large numbers.

Even if resort to the ICJ is rejected, the Special Agreement does not prevent the Belizean government from putting the issue to the people via another referendum in future.

If and when the dispute does go to the ICJ, the Court is likely to recognise the existing territorial and maritime limits of Belize.
Past precedent, the opinion of former judges, and research by international legal experts all suggest that Belize has a very strong case.

That being so, say opponents, why would Guatemala go to the ICJ?

The answer is simple: no Guatemalan politician can risk accepting this reality through bilateral negotiations without being called a traitor.
A ruling from the ICJ, however, is likely to take roughly five years to come down, by which time many of today’s politicians will have left office.
Resolving a longstanding problem today even if it creates another one for their successors is not such a difficult proposition to accept.

As a result, Belize’s 2019 referendum on taking Guatemala’s territorial and maritime claim to the ICJ could finally resolve a dispute that has dragged on for hundreds of years.

Notes: • The views expressed here are of the authors and do not reflect the position of the Centre or of the LSE • Please read our Comments Policy before commenting

About the author


Victor Bulmer-Thomas is an Associate Fellow in the US and Americas Programme at Chatham House, where he was Director from 2001 to 2006.
A specialist on the Americas, he has published nearly thirty books, including The Economic History of Belize: from 17th Century to Post-Independence (Cubola, 2012).
His latest book is Empire in Retreat: the Past, Present and Future of the United States (Yale University Press, 2018).



####
document number 12: 
Timeline: Political crisis in Ukraine and Russia's occupation of Crimea


KIEV (Reuters) - Here is a timeline of the fall of Ukraine’s government and Russia’s subsequent incursion into Ukraine’s Crimea region.


Ukrainian navy ships are docked at the Crimean port of Yevpatorya March 8, 2014.
REUTERS/David Mdzinarishvili


The crisis began in November when Ukraine’s then president, Viktor Yanukovich, under Russian pressure, turned his back on a trade deal with the EU and accepted a $15 billion bailout from Moscow.
That prompted three months of street protests, leading to the overthrow of Yanukovich on February 22.

Moscow denounced the events as an illegitimate coup and refused to recognize the new Ukrainian authorities.
In late February, Russian troops seized the Crimean peninsula in a bloodless military takeover.

* Nov 21: Kiev suddenly announces suspension of trade and association talks with the EU and opts to revive economic ties with Moscow.

Several hundred Ukrainians gather on the capital’s central Independence Square to protest.

* Nov 22: Jailed opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko urges Ukrainians to protest against the switch away from the EU.

* Nov 24: Some 100,000 people rally in Kiev against spurning the EU.

* Nov 25: Ukrainian police fire tear gas at demonstrators.

* Nov 29: At the EU summit in the Lithuanian capital Vilnius, Yanukovich fails to sign the association agreement.

* Nov 30: Riot police try to break up the Kiev demonstration by force.
Protest turns against Yanukovich and his government.

* Dec 1: Some 350,000 people protest in Kiev and clash with police.
Crowds turn Independence Square into a protest tent city.
Opposition leaders call on Yanukovich to resign.

* Dec 4: Senior EU officials and ministers start visiting the protest square.

* Dec 6: Yanukovich holds previously unannounced talks in Sochi with Putin on "strategic partnership".

* Dec 8: Some 800,000 people rally in Kiev.
A statue of Lenin is toppled.

* Dec 13: Yanukovich’s first face-to-face talks with opposition bring no breakthrough in crisis.

* Dec 15: EU suspends talks with Ukraine on the pact.
Some 200,000 people rally in Kiev.

* Dec 17: Yanukovich and Putin meet for second time since crisis began.
Putin agrees to buy $15 billion of Ukrainian debt and to slash by a third the price of Russian gas supplies to Ukraine.

* Dec 18: Tens of thousands of protesters gather in Kiev, calling for Yanukovich to resign over bailout.

* Dec 20: About 100,000 take to square in central Kiev, opposition forms bloc called Maidan.

Dec 24: Ukraine receives first $3 billion tranche of Russian bailout.

* Jan 12: At least 50,000 protesters march in Kiev, reviving the movement after a Christmas and New Year lull.

* Jan 15: Ukraine court bans protests in central Kiev.

* Jan 17: Yanukovich signs new laws banning anti-government protests.

* Jan 19: Thousands protest in Kiev defying ban, some clashing with riot police.

* Jan 22: Three people die during protests and EU threatens action over handling of crisis.
Talks between opposition and Yanukovich fail.

* Jan 23: Washington threatens sanctions if violence continues.

* Jan 26: Police clash with protesters in Kiev.
Unrest spreads to traditionally pro-Yanukovich east.
Yanukovich offers important government posts to opposition, who say they will press for more concessions, including early elections.

* Jan 27: Yanukovich and opposition agree to scrap some of the anti-protest laws.
Protesters try to storm Kiev cultural centre.

* Jan 28: Ukrainian Prime Minister Mykola Azarov resigns.
Deputies loyal to Yanukovich overturn anti-protest laws in a bid to restore calm.

* Jan 30: Yanukovich goes on sick leave, announcing that he is suffering from an acute respiratory ailment.

* Jan 31: Still on sick leave, Yanukovich signs into law a conditional amnesty for those detained in the unrest.

* Feb 2: Yanukovich returns to work after four days’ sick leave, protesters fill Kiev’s main square.

* Feb 7: Moscow accuses the United States of trying to foment a coup in Ukraine.
Washington says Russia leaked a recording of U.S. diplomats discussing how to shape a new government in Kiev.

* Feb 9: Pressure on Yanukovich grows as protests against him continue and Russia links disbursement of next tranche of a $15 billion aid package to repayment of hefty gas bill.

* Feb 14: Russia accuses EU of seeking Ukraine "sphere of influence".
Protesters released under amnesty but streets still tense.

* Feb 17: Russia boosts Yanukovich with $2 billion fresh cash injection to Ukraine.

* Feb 18: At least 14 people die as protesters clash with police in worst violence since demonstrations began.

* Feb 19: West threatens sanctions after death toll rises to 26.
Yanukovich denounces bloodshed as an attempted coup.

* Feb 20: At least 39 die in clashes in Kiev.
Foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland meet with Yanukovich, extend stay to put a political roadmap to opposition leaders.

* Feb 21: Opposition leaders sign EU-mediated peace pact Yanukovich to end violence that killed at least 77 people.

* Feb 22: Ukraine’s parliament votes to remove Yanukovich, who flees his Kiev office, denouncing what he says is a coup.
His arch-rival Yulia Tymoshenko is released from jail.

* Feb 24: Fugitive Yanukovich indicted for "mass murder" over demonstrator deaths.
Moscow says it will not deal with leaders of "armed mutiny" against Yanukovich.

* Feb 26: Ukraine names ministers for new government.
Angry Russia puts 150,000 troops on high alert.
Washington warns Moscow against military intervention.

* Feb 27: Armed men seize Crimea parliament, raise Russian flag.
Kiev’s new rulers warn Moscow to keep troops within its naval base on the peninsula.
Hryvnia falls to record low.

* Feb 28: Armed men take control of two airports in Crimea, described by Ukrainian minister as invasion by Moscow’s forces.
Ousted Yanukovich surfaces in Russia after a week on the run.

* March 1: Putin wins parliamentary approval to invade Ukraine.
In Kiev, new government warns of war, puts troops on high alert and appeals to NATO for help.
White House warns Russia of economic, political isolation.
Russian forces fan out in Crimea.
Pro-Moscow demonstrations erupt across Ukraine’s south and east in what Kiev calls an attempt to repeat Crimea scenario.

* March 2: Russian forces tighten grip on Crimea.
Ukraine announces call-up of reserves.
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry condemns Russia for "incredible act of aggression", threatening "very serious repercussions".

* March 3: Markets open for first time since Kremlin announcement of right to invade.
Russian share prices and ruble plummet.

* March 4: Putin announces end to war games in Western Russia, orders troops near frontier back to barracks.
Ukraine says Russian navy has blocked strait between Crimea and Russia.
Putin says military force in Ukraine would only be "last resort".
Kerry in Kiev.
U.S. official says Washington working on sanctions against Russia.

* March 5: Russia rebuffs calls to withdraw troops from Crimea, saying "self-defense" forces are not under its command.
European Union pledges 11 billion euros in aid to Kiev.

* March 6: Crimea’s pro-Russian leadership votes to join Russia and sets referendum for March 16, escalating crisis.
U.S. President Barack Obama says referendum would violate international law and orders sanctions on those responsible for Moscow’s military intervention in Ukraine.

EU leaders hold an emergency summit to try to find ways to pressure Russia to back down and accept mediation.
Military monitors from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe barred from entering Crimea.

* March 7: After hour-long phone call with Obama, Putin says they are still far apart.

* March 8: Warning shots are fired to prevent an unarmed international military observer mission from entering Crimea.
Russian forces become increasingly aggressive towards Ukrainian troops trapped in bases.



####
document number 13: 
Recommendation for assistance to Greece and Turkey






Address before a joint session of US senate and the US house of representatives


by the Presisent of the United States, Harry Truman The gravity of the situation which confronts the world today necessitates my appearance before a joint session of the Congress.
The foreign policy and the national security of this country are involved.
One aspect of the present situation, which I wish to present to you at this time for your consideration and decision, concerns Greece and Turkey.
The United States has received from the Greek Government an urgent appeal for financial and economic assistance.
Preliminary reports from the American Economic Mission now in Greece and reports from the American Ambassador in Greece corroborate the statement of the Greek Government that assistance is imperative if Greece is to survive as a free nation.
I do not believe that the American people and the Congress wish to turn a deaf ear to the appeal of the Greek Government.
Greece is not a rich country.
Lack of sufficient natural resources has always forced the Greek people to work hard to make both ends meet.
Since 1940, this industrious and peace-loving country has suffered invasion, four years of cruel enemy occupation, and bitter internal strife.
When forces of liberation entered Greece they found that the retreating Germans had destroyed virtually all the railways, roads, port facilities, communications and merchant marine.
More than a thousand villages had been burned.
Eighty-five per cent of the children were tubercular.
Livestock, poultry and draft animals had almost disappeared.
Inflation had wiped out practically all savings.
As a result of these tragic conditions, a military minority, exploiting human want and misery, was able to create political chaos which, until now, has made economic recovery impossible.
Greece is today without funds to finance the importation of those goods which are essential to bare subsistence.
Under these circumstances the people of Greece cannot make progress in solving their problems of reconstruction.
Greece is in desperate need of financial and economic assistance to enable it to resume purchases of food, clothing, fuel and seeds.
These are indispensable for the subsistence of its people and are obtainable only from abroad.
Greece must have help to import the goods necessary to restore internal order and security so essential for economic and political recovery.
The Greek Government has also asked for the assistance of experienced American administrators, economists and technicians to insure that the financial and other aid given to Greece shall be used effectively in creating a stable and self-sustaining economy and in improving its public administration.
The very existence of the Greek state is today threatened by the terrorist activities of several thousand armed men, led by Communists, who defy the Government's authority at a number of points, particularly along the northern boundaries.
A commission appointed by the United Nations Security Council is at present investigating disturbed conditions in northern Greece and alleged border violations along the frontier between Greece on the one hand and Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the other.
Meanwhile, the Greek Government is unable to cope with the situation.
The Greek Army is small and poorly equipped.
It needs supplies and equipment if it is to restore the authority of the Government throughout Greek territory.
Greece must have assistance if it is to become a self-supporting and self-respecting democracy.
The United States must supply that assistance.
We have already extended to Greece certain types of relief and economic aid but these are inadequate.
There is no other country to which democratic Greece can turn.
No other nation is willing and able to provide the necessary support for a democratic Greek Government.
The British Government, which has been helping Greece, can give no further financial or economic aid after March.
Great Britain finds itself under the necessity of reducing or liquidating its commitments in several parts of the world, including Greece.
We have considered how the United Nations might assist in this crisis.
But the situation is an urgent one requiring immediate action, and the United Nations and its related organizations are not in a position to extend help of the kind that is required.
It is important to note that the Greek Government has asked for our aid in utilizing effectively the financial and other assistance we may give to Greece, and in improving public administration.
It is of the utmost importance that we supervise the use of any funds made available to Greece, in such a manner that each dollar spent will count toward making Greece self-supporting, and will help to build an economy in which a healthy democracy can flourish.
No government is perfect.
One of the chief virtues of a democracy, however, is that its defects are always visible and under democratic processes can be pointed out and corrected.
The Government of Greece is not perfect.
Nevertheless it represents 85 per cent of the members of the Greek parliament who were chosen in an election last year.
Foreign observers, including 692 Americans, considered this election to be a fair expression of the views of the Greek people.
The Greek Government has been operating in an atmosphere of chaos and extremism.
It has made mistakes.
The extension of aid by this country does not mean that the United States condones everything that the Greek Government has done or will do.
We have condemned in the past, and we condemn now, extremist measures of the Right or the Left.
We have in the past advised tolerance, and we advise tolerance now.
Greece's neighbor, Turkey, also deserves our attention.
The future of Turkey as an independent and economically sound State is clearly no less important to the freedom-loving peoples of the world than the future of Greece.
The circumstances in which Turkey finds itself today are considerably different from those of Greece.
Turkey has been spared the disasters that have beset Greece.
And during the war, the United States and Great Britain furnished Turkey with material aid.
Nevertheless, Turkey now needs our support.
Since the war Turkey has sought financial assistance from Great Britain and the United States for the purpose of effecting that modernization necessary for the maintenance of its national integrity.
That integrity is essential to the preservation of order in the Middle East.
The British Government has informed us that, owing to its own difficulties, it can no longer extend financial or economic aid to Turkey.
As in the case of Greece, if Turkey is to have the assistance it needs, the United States must supply it.
We are the only country able to provide that help.
I am fully aware of the broad implications involved if the United States extends assistance to Greece and Turkey, and I shall discuss these implications with you at this time.
One of the primary objectives of the foreign policy of the United States is the creation of conditions in which we and other nations will be able to work out a way of life free from coercion.
This was a fundamental issue in the war with Germany and Japan.
Our victory was won over countries which sought to impose their will, and their way of life, upon other nations.
To ensure the peaceful development of nations, free from coercion, the United States has taken a leading part in establishing the United Nations.
The United Nations is designed to make possible lasting freedom and independence for all its members.
We shall not realize our objectives, however, unless we are willing to help free people to maintain their free institutions and their national integrity against aggressive movements that seek to impose upon them totalitarian regimes.
This is no more than a frank recognition that totalitarian regimes imposed on free peoples, by direct or indirect aggression, undermine the foundations of international peace and hence the security of the United States.
The peoples of a number of countries of the world have recently had totalitarian regimes forced upon them against their will.
The Government of the United States has made frequent protests against coercion and intimidation in violation of the Yalta agreement, in Poland, Rumania, and Bulgaria.
I must also state that in a number of other countries there have been similar developments.
At the present moment in world history nearly every nation must choose between alternative ways of life.
The choice is too often not a free one.
One way of life is based upon the will of the majority, and is distinguished by free institutions, representative government, free elections, guaranties of individual liberty, freedom of speech and religion, and freedom from political oppression.
The second way of life is based upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed upon the majority.
It relies upon terror and oppression, a controlled press and radio, fixed elections, and the suppression of personal freedoms.
I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.
I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way.
I believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financial aid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes.
The world is not static, and the status quo is not sacred.
But we cannot allow changes in the status quo in violation of the Charter of the United Nations by such methods as coercion, or by such subterfuges as political infiltration.
In helping free and independent nations to maintain their freedom, the United States will be giving effect to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
It is necessary only to glance at a map to realize that the survival and integrity of the Greek nation are of grave importance in a much wider situation.
If Greece should fall under the control of an armed minority, the effect upon its neighbor, Turkey, would be immediate and serious.
Confusion and disorder might well spread throughout the entire Middle East.
Moreover, the disappearance of Greece as an independent State would have a profound effect upon those countries in Europe whose peoples are struggling against great difficulties to maintain their freedoms and their independence while they repair the damages of war.
It would be an unspeakable tragedy if these countries, which have struggled so long against overwhelming odds, should lose that victory for which they sacrificed so much.
Collapse of free institutions and loss of independence would be disastrous not only for them but for the world.
Discouragement and possibly failure would quickly be the lot of neighboring peoples striving to maintain their freedom and independence.
Should we fail to aid Greece and Turkey in this fateful hour, the effect will be far-reaching to the West as well as to the East.
We must take immediate and resolute action.
I therefore ask the Congress to provide authority for assistance to Greece and Turkey in the amount of $400,000,000 for the period ending June 30, 1948.
In requesting these funds, l have taken into consideration the maximum amount of relief assistance which would be furnished to Greece out of the $350,000,000 which I recently requested that the Congress authorize for the prevention of starvation and suffering in countries devastated by the war.
In addition to funds, I ask the Congress to authorize the detail of American civilian and military personnel to Greece and Turkey, at the request of those countries, to assist in the tasks of reconstruction, and for the purpose of supervising the use of such financial and material assistance as may be furnished.
I recommend that authority also be provided for the instruction and training of selected Greek and Turkish personnel.
Finally, I ask that the Congress provide authority which will permit the speediest and most effective use, in terms of needed commodities, supplies and equipment, of such funds as may be authorized.
If further funds, or further authority, should be needed for purposes indicated in this message, I shall not hesitate to bring the situation before the Congress.
On this subject the executive and legislative branches of the Government must work together.
This is a serious course upon which we embark.
l would not recommend it except that the alternative is much more serious.
The United States contributed $341,000,000,000 toward winning world war II.
This is an investment in world freedom and world peace.
The assistance that I am recommending for Greece and Turkey amounts to little more than one-tenth of 1 per cent of this investment.
It is only common sense that we should safeguard this investment and make sure that it was not in vain.
The seeds of totalitarian regimes are nurtured by misery and want.
They spread and grow in the evil soil of poverty and strife.
They reach their full growth when the hope of a people for a better life has died.
We must keep that hope alive.
The free peoples of the world look to us for support in maintaining their freedoms.
If we falter in our leadership, we may endanger the peace of the world and we shall surely endanger the welfare of our own nation.
Great responsibilities have been placed upon us by the swift movement of events.
I am confident that the Congress will face these responsibilities squarely.






####
document number 14: 
War by Proxy: Iran’s Growing Footprint in the Middle East


The Issue

There is growing Iranian activism in the Middle East despite U.S. and allied efforts to weaken Iran’s economy and politically isolate Tehran.
There has been an increase in the size and capabilities of militias supported by the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps-Quds Force in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Yemen collectively.
Iran is also working to establish a land bridge across the region.
Nevertheless, Iran has weaknesses and vulnerabilities that can be exploited by the United States and its partners.



Tehran wields influence in the Middle East through its use of non-state partners, despite renewed U.S. sanctions against Iran and a U.S. withdrawal from the nuclear deal.
Iran’s economic woes have not contributed to declining activism in the region—at least not yet.
If anything, Iranian leaders appear just as committed as ever to engagement across the Middle East using irregular methods.
According to data collected and analyzed in this brief, there has been an increase in the overall size and capability of foreign forces that are partnered with the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps-Quds Force (IRGC-QF), Iran’s paramilitary organization responsible for foreign operations.
The IRGC-QF’s partners are in countries like Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen, and Afghanistan.
Iran is also attempting to establish land corridors across the region and increase its ability to move fighters and material from one theater to another.

More broadly, there is a growing regional conflict with Iran, which consists of a war in Yemen (including the Houthi use of ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia), an escalating conflict with Israel in Syria, a growth of Shia militia forces in Iraq, targeted assassinations, and cyberattacks.
Iran’s expanding presence in Syria, for example, has led to concerns among Israeli leaders, who have authorized hundreds of military strikes against missile and other targets over the past few years.
Based in part on IRGC-QF assistance, Iran’s partners have improved their capabilities in such areas as missiles and drones.
These developments are significant because Iranian leaders have assessed that irregular warfare— including support to non-state partners—is a critical element to competing with the United States in the region.

Tehran wields influence in the Middle East through its use of non-state partners, despite renewed U.S. sanctions against Iran and a U.S. withdrawal from the nuclear deal.


Yet Iran—and the IRGC-QF in particular—have vulnerabilities and weaknesses that may be exploitable, such as possible long-term overextension with an already weak economy and continuing divisions among Iraq’s Shia community about Iran and its doctrine of velayat-e faqih (the Islamic system of clerical rule).
Overall, Iranian actions have also created growing regional concerns about Tehran’s attempt to expand its power and influence, which can be leveraged for more effective balancing.

This brief analyzes IRGC-QF activities in several ways.
It compiles a data base of Iranian proxy groups over time—including their capabilities and size—in order to gauge trends.
It also analyzes satellite imagery of bases in countries like Syria, Lebanon, and Iran used by the IRGC-QF to better understand Iranian force posture and activities.

1

Finally, it compiles and analyzes a data base of Israeli attacks against targets in Syria, which provides a useful indicator of Iranian activity.

The rest of this brief is divided into four sections.
The first provides an overview of the IRGC-QF’s creation, activities, and organizational structure.
The second section analyzes trends in IRGC-QF activity, including patterns in the size of Iranian state and non-state partners.
The third assesses IRGC-QF actions in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Lebanon, and other countries.
The fourth analyzes weaknesses, vulnerabilities, and opportunities.

Born of the Revolution


The IRGC, or

sepah-e pasdaran-e enqelab-e eslami

, was founded in 1979 shortly after the Islamic Revolution.
Ayatollah Khomenei envisioned the IRGC as a force to protect the revolution against internal and external threats.
As he remarked, IRGC soldiers were to be "the guardians of the revolution and the fighting sons of Islam."

2

Since Khomeini was suspicious of the loyalty of some officers in Iran’s regular military, whom he worried still had ties with Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, he created the IRGC to defend Iran and—more importantly—safeguard Iran’s theocratic system.
Since Khomeini’s conception of velayat-e faqih emphasized the importance of the clergy (ulama) in national decisionmaking, the IRGC’s link to the supreme leader was critical.
In Khomenei’s view, a legitimate Islamic government needs to be run by a senior cleric (marja al-taqlid) or by a body of high-ranking clergy (fuqaha).

3

Pro-clerical militants had been helpful in bringing down the Pahlavi regime, and Khomeini pulled them together under a single banner in the IRGC.
The organization’s proximity and devotion to Khomeini gave it immense power and legitimacy.
The IRGC, then, would be the vanguard of the revolution.

4


The IRGC eventually included an air force, land force, navy, IRGC-QF, and Basij (or mobilization).
The Basij is an auxiliary militia that is engaged in activities such as conducting internal security, enforcing state control over society, policing morals, and suppressing dissidents.
The IRGC manages large domestic commercial elements and, along with the Office of the Supreme Leader, controls a substantial portion of the Iranian economy.

5


Shortly after the IRGC’s creation, its leaders established a paramilitary organization, which became the IRGC-QF (

sepah-e quds

).
Over time, the IRGC-QF, which reports directly to the Supreme Leader of Iran, became active in supporting state and sub-state allies outside of the country through units like Department 400 (or the Misaq Unit), which is in charge of special operations.

6

The IRGC-QF is Iran’s primary irregular force and is instrumental in helping expand its influence in the region.
It engages in a wide range of activity, such as gathering intelligence; training, equipping, and funding state and non-state partner forces; conducting assassinations and bombings; perpetrating cyberattacks; and providing humanitarian and economic aid.

7



The IRGC-QF is Iran’s primary irregular

force and is instrumental in helping expand its influence in the region.


The IRGC-QF includes sections devoted to specific countries and regions, such as the Ramazan Corps (Iraq), Levant Corps (Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, and Israel), Rasulallah Corps (Arabian Peninsula), and Ansar Corps (Afghanistan).

8

These forces help Iran counter its state adversaries in a broad "Axis of Resistance" that extends from the Persian Gulf through Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq to the eastern parts of the Mediterranean Sea.

9

The IRGC-QF also has active and growing cyber capabilities.

10

While the IRGC as a whole has over 125,000 forces, there are more than 15,000 IRGC-QF soldiers.

11


Figure 1 shows satellite imagery of the Imam Ali facility west of Tehran, which has been used by the IRGC-QF for training.

12

CSIS’s review of satellite imagery of the facility indicates that the base was a minor facility from 2000 to 2003, and then went through a major infrastructure development phase beginning around 2003.
The approximately 222-acre facility is surrounded by a security wall and fence with guard towers and includes a comprehensive collection of training and support components.
Functionally, it can be divided into several areas: warehouse and storage, housing and support, headquarters administration and classrooms, mosque and religious education, the original base, and combat training facilities.
The combat facilities include a 100-meter firing range; a second 100-meter open range that could be used for rocket launcher, improvised explosives and other weapons training; a driver training course; an obstacle course; and a combat course consisting of a dispersed collection of small walls, miscellaneous objects and likely small vehicles used to train troops for combat in urban areas.

13

Locations like Imam Ali have allowed Iran to train and advise partner forces from across the region.

The IRGC-QF has its roots in irregular warfare.
The Iran-Iraq War (1980-1988) was a major turning point in Iran’s military doctrine, since Iranian conventional units performed poorly against a much smaller Iraqi force.Instead, Iran’s comparative advantage became its ability to work with state and non-state actors—an irregular approach led by the IRGC, including the IRGC-QF, rather than conventional Iranian military forces (artesh).
During the Iran-Iraq War, for example, Iran aided Iraqi Shia militant groups.
Some of this training was done inside Iran, which allowed Tehran to develop a system and infrastructure within its borders to train and equip foreign fighters.
Among the most important of the Iraqi Shia groups trained by Iran was the Badr Brigade, the armed wing of Ayatollah Mohammad Baqir Hakim’s Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI).
Overall, nearly 5,000 foreign Shia militants wearing IRGC uniforms were killed in the war.

Outside of Iraq, the IRGC established a relationship with the Amal Movement in Lebanon and then Lebanese Hezbollah.
Iran provided money, equipment, training, and ideological inspiration to Lebanese Hezbollah.
As the IRGC commander in Lebanon noted in 1985, "The Muslims of Lebanon, especially the Shiites of Lebanese Hezbollah, consider themselves the offspring of the Islamic revolution and therefore know that they have a duty to imitate [taba’iyyat kardan] the Islamic revolution.
"Over the next several decades, the IRGC-QF and other Iranian agencies like the Ministry of Intelligence (MOIS) established relationships with state and non-state actors in the Middle East and South Asia.Not all were Shia groups.
The Taliban in Afghanistan and Palestinian Islamic Jihad in Palestinian territory, for example, were Sunni organizations.

Iranian Expansion


Today, the IRGC-QF is active in building, funding, training, and partnering with a growing number of actors in the region—a testament to Iran’s commitment to irregular warfare.
The IRGC-QF’s relationship with these actors varies considerably, and in many cases is more of a partnership than a malleable patron-client relationship.

19


To get an estimate of the number of fighters in IRGC-QF partner forces, we compiled a data set of fighters from 2011 to 2018 and then totaled the number operating each year.
We did not attempt to estimate the broader number of supporters, since we could find no reliable estimates of individuals that provided part-time logistical help, funding, intelligence, or other aid.
Calculating the number of fighters is still challenging.
Groups generally do not provide public estimates of their numbers, and their numbers can vary considerably over the course of a group’s existence.
Consequently, we included high and low estimates for the number of fighters by year.
We attempted to reconcile differences in estimates by examining the sources of data and interviewing government and non-government experts.
We used high and low estimates with the assumption that the actual numbers each year were somewhere between the extremes.

Today, the IRGC-QF is active in building, funding, training, and partnering

with a growing number of actors in the region—a testament to Iran’s commitment to irregular warfare.



Figure 2 shows trends in the size of IRGC-QF partners in Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Lebanon.
While the IRGC-QF’s relationship with these groups varies dramatically, aggregating them together provides a useful indicator of trends.
The data and figure suggest several developments.
First, there has been an increase in the number of Shia fighters.
The war in Syria contributed to a significant rise, particularly by 2014, as Lebanese Hezbollah deployed fighters and Iran trained, equipped, and funded Shia militias from across the region to support the struggling Assad regime.
Today, examples of forces supported by the IRGC-QF include Lebanese Hezbollah; the Hashd al-Sha’abi in Iraq (including groups like the Badr Organization, Kata’ib Hezbollah, and Asaib Ahl al- Haq); militia forces in Syria, including Lebanese Hezbollah; the Houthis in Yemen; Liwa Fatemiyoun from Afghanistan; Liwa Zainabyoun from Pakistan; and several groups in Palestinian territory like Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
Second, there has been an expansion in locations where IRGC-QF forces have been active.
The IRGC-QF has worked to broaden its areas of operation to include traditional countries like Lebanon and Iraq (where the IRGC-QF has long had partners) to countries like Yemen and Syria.

20


The 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq, the inability of the United States and its partners to prevent Iran from filling the vacuum, and the establishment of a Shia- dominated government in Baghdad contributed to a rise in Iranian influence and an increase in IRGC- QF-supported militias.
By 2011, the Arab Spring created opportunities for Iran with the weakening of regimes and the onset or expansion of insurgencies in countries like Syria, Yemen, and Iraq.
In Iraq, the 2011 withdrawal of U.S. forces was helpful to Iran, particularly with an Iraqi government that welcomed Iranian help.
In Syria, the Assad regime was in dire need of help following a civil war that began in 2011.
Iran supported Syrian military advances and Russian airstrikes by aiding local militias, including Lebanese Hezbollah.
In Yemen, Houthi security forces seized the capital, Sana’a, in 2014.
In addition, the IRGC- QF and its leader, Qassem Soleimani, took advantage of these opportunities to provide money, weapons, and other assistance to partners in the absence of significant balancing by the United States and other countries.

Iran has used its partners and activities in an attempt to establish a land bridge across the region, as highlighted in Figure 3.
Some Lebanese Hezbollah fighters have referred to this land bridge as Wilayat Imam Ali (the state or province of Imam Ali), in honor of Ali ibn Abi Talib, the cousin and son-in-law of the Prophet Muhammad.
These routes, which remain partly aspirational, include: a northern route through Iran, Iraq’s Kurdish region, the Iraqi city of Sinjar, northeastern Syria cities like Al-Hasakah, and into Lebanon; a central route through Iran, central Iraq, the Iraqi border town of Al-Qaim, Syria’s Abu Kamal and Dayr az Zawr, and into Lebanon; and a southern route through Iran, the Iraqi border town of Al-Walid, Al-Tanf in Syria, Damascus, and into Lebanon.
These corridors resemble the Royal Road, the ancient land bridge built by Persian King Darius the Great in the fifth century BC.A U.S. withdrawal from Syria could facilitate the expansion of these corridors, particularly a departure of U.S. troops from bases like Al-Tanf in southeastern Syria.


Iran has used its partners and activities in an attempt to establish a land bridge across the region.



Iran’s growing influence has been particularly concerning in Syria.
Figure 4 uses CSIS research and analysis to plot the location of Israeli attacks against Iranian and other targets in Syria.
The darker shades of blue in the heat map indicate a higher concentration of Israeli strikes.
Most of Israel’s attacks were in southwestern Syria, near the Israeli border.
But a few operations were against major bases used by Hezbollah, Iran, and other proxy militias, such as T-4 Tiyas Airbase in Homs, the airbase north of al-Qusayr, and Damascus International Airport.
Both Israeli government public statements and the rising number of strikes over the past two years indicate that Israel has been increasingly concerned about the encroachment and growing capabilities of Iran and its partner forces.
As Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu remarked, "We will continue to aggressively act against Iran’s efforts to entrench in Syria."


The IRGC-QF is

particularly active in such countries as Lebanon, Yemen, Iraq, and Syria.


Lebanese Hezbollah, and other groups that could hit Israel.There are indications that Iran may move some of its missiles and missile parts to Iraq after coming under Israeli pressure in Lebanon and Syria.An interactive version of this map is available on the CSIS website.

Proxy Wars


The IRGC-QF is particularly active in such countries as Lebanon, Yemen, Iraq, and Syria.
It has provided military and non- military aid to partners, boosting their capabilities and increasing Tehran’s influence.

In Lebanon, the IRGC-QF’s chief partner, Hezbollah, has improved its military capabilities and become more involved in the government.


Lebanon: In Lebanon, the IRGC-QF’s chief partner, Hezbollah, has improved its military capabilities and become more involved in the government.
Among the most important activities is the "Precision Project": the effort to expand and upgrade Hezbollah’s inventory of rockets, missiles, and drones.

27

With Iran’s help, Hezbollah has amassed a range of weapons and systems, such as the Fateh-110/M-600 short-range ballistic missile, Shahab-1 and Shahab-2 short-range ballistic missiles, Toophan anti-tank guided missiles, Kornet man-portable anti-tank guided missiles, M113 armored personnel carriers, T-72 main battle tanks, Karrar unmanned combat aerial vehicles, and Katyusha rocket launchers.

28

Hezbollah’s armed drone capabilities are among the most advanced of any terrorist group in the world, and it has used Karrar armed drones to destroy Islamic State targets in Syria.

29

In addition, Hezbollah may have stockpiled chemical weapons in Syria, including chlorine.

30


The IRGC-QF has been critical to these developments.
Hassan Nasrallah, the group’s secretary general, said in June 2016: "Hezbollah’s budget, salaries, expenses, arms and missiles are coming from the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Is this clear?
This is no one’s business.
As long as Iran has money, we have money.
Can we be any more frank about that?"

31


Figure 5 highlights satellite imagery of a Hezbollah training camp in southern Lebanon located southeast of the town of Beit Moubarak, on the eastern and southern slopes of El Boqaa.
A CSIS analysis of satellite imagery suggests that the El Boqaa facility is dispersed within an area encompassing approximately 4.5 square kilometers and consists of at least six general components:


Firing ranges:

There are three firing ranges.
The largest two are located in a small valley on the west side of the training facility.
These appear to be designed for use by armored personnel carriers and improvised armored fighting vehicles.
The third firing range is located 800 meters east of the first two.
It consists of five small pistol and rifle ranges varying in length from 8 to100-meters-long.


Housing and storage area:

Located just north of the firing ranges is an area that appears to be used for both housing and storage with approximately 35 small structures and a single large storage building


Driver training facility:

Immediately east of the housing and storage area is a serpentine one- kilometer-long driver training course that is capable of handling armored fighting vehicles, trucks, and smaller vehicles.


Two

urban combat facilities:

Located on the east of the driver training course are two different urban


combat courses.
The first is approximately 115-meters by 35-meters and consists of six interconnected lanes.
Each lane is bordered by a low wall.
Numerous dispersed objects within these lanes strongly suggest that it is also used as an obstacle course.
The second urban combat course is located a further 160 meters to the east.


Quarries:

There are numerous small quarrying-type activities throughout the area encompassing the combat training facilities.
These quarries could be used for improvised explosives and rocket launcher training.


Probable

headquarters and support areas:

Located on the northern and northeastern sides of the training facility are small areas that consist of approximately 20 larger storage, maintenance, office, and housing structures.

33



Hezbollah also became more directly involved in Lebanese politics after the group and its allies expanded their share of seats in Lebanon’s May 2018 parliamentary elections.
In 2019, Hezbollah continued to increase its influence in the government, particularly through positions like the Ministry of Health.
The U.S. government warned Hezbollah that if it tried to "exploit these ministries to funnel money or undertake other activities in support of their terrorist agenda, then we will have significant concerns."

Yemen: The IRGC-QF also has provided aid to the Houthis (officially called Ansar Allah).
Of particular concern are Iranian weapons and parts, including ballistic missiles and drones, that have been used by the Houthis to threaten shipping near the Bab el Mandeb Strait and conduct attacks against land-based targets in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).The Bab el Mandeb Strait, located at the southern end of the Red Sea between Yemen and Djibouti, is important because roughly 5 million barrels of oil pass through it every day.Iran’s objectives in Yemen include retaining—and perhaps increasing—Iran’s influence along the Red Sea as well as weakening Saudi Arabia and the UAE.

The Houthi threat has increased because of Iran’s proliferation of missiles, missile technology, and missile parts.


Around 2016, as the war in Yemen intensified due to the growing involvement of Saudi Arabia and the UAE, Iran began increasing its aid to the Houthis.
It provided anti-tank guided missiles, sea mines, aerial drones, 122-millimeter Katyusha rockets, Misagh-2 man-portable air defense systems (MANPADS), RDX high explosives, ballistic missiles, unmanned explosive boats, radar systems, and mining equipment.

38

The IRGC-QF and Lebanese Hezbollah also provided training in Yemen and Iran.

39


The Houthi threat has increased because of Iran’s proliferation of missiles, missile technology, and missile parts.
One example is the use of Borkan-2H mobile, short- range ballistic missiles, which the Houthis used to strike Riyadh and other targets in Saudi Arabia.
A United Nations panel of experts concluded that the missiles were "a derived lighter version" of Iran’s Qiam-1 missile and that Iran provided key missile parts to the Houthis.

40

Analysis from the wreckage of 10 Borkan-2H missiles indicates that they were likely smuggled into Yemen in parts and then put together.
Iranian components were also integrated into Yemeni SA-2 surface-to-air missiles to construct the Qaher series of surface-to-surface rockets.

41

Iran may have used a number of routes to transport the material to Yemen, including ship-to-shore transfers through the Yemen ports of Nishtun and Al-Ghaydah in Al-Mahrah governorate.

42


Iraq: The IRGC-QF remains active in Iraq and has enhanced Iran’s political, military, and economic power.
Iran has helped Shia militia forces in Iraq build their missile production capabilities.
According to some reporting, there have been factories used to develop missiles in such Iraqi locations as Jurf al-Sakhar (north of Kerbala) and Al- Zafaraniya (east of Baghdad).

43


There are three main groups that comprise the Hashd al- Sha’abi, an umbrella organization of Shia militias.
First are those groups loyal to Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, which have a particularly close relationship with the IRGC-QF.
Examples include the Badr Organization, Asaib Ahl al-Haq, Kata’ib Hezbollah, Kataeb Sayed al-Shuhada, and Harakat Hizbollah al-Nujaba.
Second are the groups loyal to Grand Aytatollah Ali al-Sistani, such as Sarayat al-Ataba al-Abbasiya, Sarayat al-Ataba al-Huseiniya, Sarayat al-Ataba al-Alawiya, and Liwa Ali al-Akbar.
Sistani urged fighters to join the Iraqi government’s security organizations—not paramilitary groups tied to Iran—in his June 2014 fatwa.
Third are groups loyal to Muqtada al-Sadr.
The primary organization is Sarayat al-Salam (Peace Brigades), which includes two Hashd brigades (Brigades 313 and 314).

44


The IRGC-QF has provided some Iraqi militias with short- range ballistic missiles, anti-tank guided missiles (ATGMs), tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, unmanned aerial vehicles, and MANPADS.
In addition, several Iraqi militias worked with the IRGC-QF and Iraqi forces to help liberate Tikrit, Fallujah, Ramadi, Tal Afar, Mosul, and other Iraqi cities from Islamic State control.

45

As one assessment of the 2017 Mosul campaign concluded, "The Quds Force- led Shia militia forces had some 10,000 troops in the battlespace, with many of these fighters embedded in the [Iraqi Security Forces] and FedPol."

46



Iran has provided substantial

assistance to the Assad regime by helping organize, train, and fund over 100,000 Shia fighters


Syria: Iran has provided substantial assistance to the Assad regime by helping organize, train, and fund over 100,000 Shia fighters.
Following the onset of Syria’s civil war in 2011, Iranian leaders became alarmed at both the rise of Sunni extremist groups like the Islamic State as well as U.S.,European, and Gulf support to rebel groups.

47

In addition to providing light and heavy weapons to the Syrian regime and militias, up to 3,000 IRGC-QF helped plan and execute specific military operations like Dawn of Victory (the 2016 military operation to retake Aleppo).

48

The IRGC-QF worked closely with the Assad regime and the Russian military, which conducted strikes from Russian combat aircraft and naval vessels in the Mediterranean Sea.
Syrian forces and militias, which were supported by the IRGC-QF, shelled rebel positions in Aleppo while Russian close air support and Kalibr cruise missile strikes reduced entire neighborhoods to rubble.
By December 2016, ground forces routed rebel forces, who departed under an agreement brokered by Russia, Turkey, and Iran.

49


Figure 6 shows the results of an Israeli strike against a munitions storage area at a Syrian military base in Haqlat aş Şafrah, Syria, which has been allegedly utilized by the IRGC- QF.

50

The precise nature of the Israeli attack strongly suggests accurate intelligence and a desire to limit damage to both infrastructure and personnel.

51


In addition, Lebanese Hezbollah deployed up to 8,000 fighters to Syria and, as previously noted, increased its arsenal with greater numbers and ranges of rockets and missiles from Syrian territory.Hezbollah also trained, advised, and assisted Shia and other non-state groups in Syria.
Collectively known as Al-Muqawama al-Islamiyah fi Suria (the Islamic Resistance in Syria), examples of those groups included: Quwat al Ridha (or Ridha Forces), which have operated in such Syrian governorates as Homs; Al-Ghaliboun: Saraya al-Muqawama al-Islamiyah fi Suria (or The Victors: The Companies of the Islamic Resistance in Syria), which have been active in governorates like Daraa and Quneitra; and Liwa al-Imam al-Baqir (or Baqir Brigade), which has deployed to such governorates as Aleppo.

Today, the IRGC-QF works with thousands of trained fighters in Syria who are operating in local militias.
Many of these groups, like Lebanese Hezbollah, have advanced stand-off weapons, improved cyber capabilities, more recruits, and more expansive forces in Syria capable of striking Israeli targets.
The 2006 Israel-Hezbollah War demonstrated Israel’s difficulty of rooting out Hezbollah sites in Lebanon’s heavily urbanized environment.
Time has only expanded the nature of this problem for Israel’s military to include Syria and Iraq.

Other Countries: The IRGC-QF has aided other non-state groups across the region and used them in battlefields like Syria.
For example, the IRGC-QF organized between 10,000 and 15,000 Afghan militants under the Fatemiyoun Brigade (named after Fatima, daughter of the Prophet Muhammad) and deployed them to Syria to fight alongside pro-Assad forces.
Fatemiyoun fighters were used in such battles as Aleppo, Daraa, Damascus, Hama, Homs, Latakia, Palmyra, and Dayr az Zawr.
The IRGC-QF also trained and equipped roughly 2,000 Pakistan fighters under the Zaynabiyoun Brigade (named after Zaynab, Fatima’s daughter).Iran has also utilized Bahraini fighters in Syria.
More broadly, the IRGC-QF has attempted to overthrow the Bahrain government several times and trained (along with Lebanese Hezbollah and Kata’ib Hezbollah trainers) Bahraini proxies.The IRGC-QF has aided other forces, such as the Afghan Taliban, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and Hamas—though Iran’s relationship with these organizations has been complicated.
There is an ongoing internal debate within Hamas, for example, about the group’s relationship with Iran.
The IRGC-QF also has operatives in other regions, such as Africa, Latin America, and Asia.

The IRGC-QF organized between 10,000 and 15,000 Afghan militants under the Fatemiyoun Brigade (named after Fatima, daughter of the Prophet

Muhammad) and

deployed

them

to Syria to fight alongside pro-Assad forces.



Weaknesses, Vulnerabilities, and Opportunities Despite IRGC-QF activism, there are several potential Iranian weaknesses and vulnerabilities, as well as opportunities for the United States and its partners.

First, Iran’s economy remains fragile.
The regime’s willingness to continue to resource the IRGC-QF at significant levels and remain heavily engaged across the region may eventually increase political costs at home.
According to International Monetary Fund estimates, the Iranian economy is expected to contract by 3.6 percent in 2019 because of U.S. sanctions and reduced oil production.

56

Some economists predict an inflation rate of up to 50 percent in the coming year because of high unemployment and a currency that has lost nearly 70 percent over the past 12 months.

57

The World Bank also estimates that Iran will be negatively impacted by falling exports on the demand side and a contracting industry sector on the supply side.

58

The IRGC is particularly vulnerable to an economic slowdown because it owns a vast empire of businesses and foundations, from construction companies to petrochemical and cement companies.

59


But the activity of the IRGC-QF and partners like Lebanese Hezbollah may have long-term costs and risks in blood and treasure.
According to some estimates, Iran spent up to $16 billion in Syria between 2012 and 2018.

60

The Lebanese Hezbollah presence in Syria has been controversial among some of its members and supporters because of the high number of casualties and, perhaps more importantly, the support of the Assad regime.

61

It is one thing for Lebanese Hezbollah supporters to fight Israel or even the Islamic State.
But aiding the Assad regime has been contentious.
"We are a resistance [movement], and you don’t do resistance by going to war in Syria," said one former Hezbollah fighter, "I will gladly go to fight Israel.
But I won’t send my sons to die in Syria."

62

Some protesters in Iran have expressed outrage at Iran’s interventions abroad, including in Syria.

63


Iranian media periodically has announced memorial services for fallen Quds Force officers and other military personnel in Syria, including in newspaper obituaries.
Iran suffered substantial casualties during offensive operations in cities like Aleppo.
According to some accounts, over 30 IRGC-QF operatives were killed in the first two weeks of the Aleppo campaign alone, including Brigadier General Hossein Hamadani, a former commander of Iranian forces in Syria.
IRGC-QF personnel of virtually all ranks were killed in action, from general officers to colonels, lieutenant colonels, and majors.

64

Iran’s state-backed Martyrs Foundation financially supported thousands of families of Iran-backed forces killed in Syria.

65

The Iranian people need to be reminded of the costs and risks in money and casualties that their government has incurred to fight wars in countries like Yemen and Syria, particularly with their weak economy.

Second, there is wide variation in Iraqi views of Iran, including among the Shia community.
Najaf ’s Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani and his "quietist" school of Iraqi Shiism shun direct clerical participation in politics.
Sistani’s stance is an implicit rebuke of Islamic Republic founder Ayatollah Khomeini’s doctrine of velayat-e faqih.

66

In addition, Iraqi nationalism and anti-Iranian sentiments among Iraqis continues to linger from the Iran-Iraq War.
Some public opinion polls indicate that many Iraqis are highly critical of Iran’s role in the country.

67

In Sunni areas like Al-Anbar Province, locals bitterly complain about the proliferation of Shia militias, feel alienated from a government in Baghdad they believe is too closely aligned with Shia, and protest the slow pace of reconstruction following the collapse of the Islamic State’s so-called caliphate.
As one Iraqi intelligence official acknowledged, "This is not just revenge on ISIS.
This is revenge on Sunnis."

68


Muqtada al-Sadr’s relations with the IRGC-QF has been mixed.
His father was an ardent Shia Arab activist, and his teachings on the importance of Arabism run counter to Khomeini’s pan-Shia, anti-nationalist ideology.
Muqtada also does not believe in Khomeini’s velayat-e faqih.

69

ran is now stuck attempting to mediate between the fractious Iraqi Shia groups in an environment where a single Lebanese Hezbollah-style structure is not possible.
In September 2018, Iraqi protesters stormed the Iranian consulate in the southern Iraqi city of Basra and set it on fire.

70

These fissures create opportunities for the United States and its partners—including Gulf countries—to continue to engage with Iraq’s Shia communities.
Riyadh, for example, has established a political and economic relationship with Muqtada al-Sadr.
There may be opportunities for Iraq to work with Gulf countries like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to further develop economic ties—including rail, road, and electricity links—with southern Iraqi cities like Basra.

71



Iranian activism and the proliferation

of Iranian-backed non-state actors has alarmed most governments in the region—such as Israel, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Bahrain, and Morocco— making it possible to conduct broader balancing.
Iran is largely isolated in the region.


Third, Iranian activism and the proliferation of Iranian- backed non-state actors has alarmed most governments in the region—such as Israel, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, UAE, Bahrain, and Morocco—making it possible to conduct broader balancing.
Iran is largely isolated in the region.
Some public opinion polls suggest that support for Iran across the Middle East—including in Iraq—has declined.

72

These countries can play an important role in helping the United States balance against Iran and IRGC-QF activities.

73


Israeli actions have limited Iranian activity in Syria, including near the Golan Heights.
But this pressure needs to continue, and the United States and other allies need to coordinate with each other in intelligence collection, diplomatic engagement, and limited military action to prevent an Iranian missile build-up in Syria.
Houthi expansion has stalled in Yemen because of Saudi and UAE support to local actors and aggressive interdiction.
But further political and intelligence efforts will be required to: encourage a settlement that provides sufficient guarantees that Iran will not have the same access it has enjoyed in Lebanon following the 1989 Taif Agreement; protect Saudi Arabia and other Gulf States from further missile attacks, including through improvements in air defense systems; and punish Iran for the further proliferation of missiles and missile parts.

While the situation with Iran is tense, there has not been a major conventional war with Iran.
And, as U.S.intelligence agencies recently noted, Iran is not producing a nuclear weapon despite the U.S. withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

74

Still, there is a steady drumbeat of irregular conflict.
The Houthis have launched ballistic missiles against Saudi Arabia.
The Israelis have conducted airstrikes against fixed and mobile positions in Syria that are storing or transporting Iranian missiles and missile parts.
There has been a rise in the number and capabilities of militia forces working with the IRGC-QF.
And all sides have used irregular tactics like assassinations and cyberattacks.

U.S. engagement is critical to deal with these issues and prevent the outbreak of a wider war with Iran that risks further instability in the region.


Yet Iran’s continuing activism across the region—including by the IRGC-QF and its leader, Qassem Soleimani—requires more effective U.S. cooperation with governments in Europe and across the region to balance against Tehran.
The results thus far have been mixed.

Seth G.
Jones

is the Harold Brown Chair and Director of the Transnational Threats Project at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C., as well as the author most recently of A Covert Action: Reagan, the CIA, and the Cold War Struggle in Poland (W.W. Norton) and Waging Insurgent Warfare (Oxford).

The author gives particular thanks to Nicholas Harrington and Jacob Ware for their assistance with data collection and analysis; Joseph S. Bermudez with satellite imagery and analysis; and Norman Roule, Jon Alterman, Steve Kappes, and Haim Malka for their helpful comments.


CSIS BRIEFS are produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues.
Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary.
CSIS does not take specific policy positions.
Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).

© 2019 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
All rights reserved.




####
document number 15: 
United States of America, The Death of Osama bin Laden


A.
Obama’s address to the Nation


[Source: White House, "Remarks by the President on Osama Bin Laden", 2 May 2011, available at


Tonight, President Obama addressed the Nation to announce that the United States has killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaeda.
[…]

"Tonight, I can report to the American people and to the world that the United States has conducted an operation that killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaeda, and a terrorist who’s responsible for the murder of thousands of innocent men, women, and children.

It was nearly 10 years ago that a bright September day was darkened by the worst attack on the American people in our history.
The images of 9/11 are seared into our national memory -- hijacked planes cutting through a cloudless September sky; the Twin Towers collapsing to the ground; black smoke billowing up from the Pentagon; the wreckage of Flight 93 in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, where the actions of heroic citizens saved even more heartbreak and destruction.

On September 11, 2001,[…] [w]e were also united in our resolve to protect our nation and to bring those who committed this vicious attack to justice.
We quickly learned that the 9/11 attacks were carried out by al Qaeda -- an organization headed by Osama bin Laden, which had openly declared war on the United States and was committed to killing innocents in our country and around the globe.
And so we went to war against al Qaeda to protect our citizens, our friends, and our allies.

Yet Osama bin Laden avoided capture and escaped across the Afghan border into Pakistan.
Meanwhile, al Qaeda continued to operate from along that border and operate through its affiliates across the world.

And so shortly after taking office [in January 2009, editor’s note], I directed Leon Panetta, the director of the CIA, to make the killing or capture of bin Laden the top priority of our war against al Qaeda, even as we continued our broader efforts to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat his network.

Then, last August, after years of painstaking work by our intelligence community, I was briefed on a possible lead to bin Laden.

And finally, last week, I determined that we had enough intelligence to take action, and authorized an operation to get Osama bin Laden and bring him to justice.

B.
New York Times, Background on the Death of Osama bin Laden


[Source: The New York Times, The Death of Osama bin Laden, http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/b/osama_bin_laden/index.html?scp=1-spot=osama%20bin%20laden=cse]


Osama bin Laden was a son of the Saudi elite whose radical violent campaign to recreate a seventh-century Muslim empire redefined the threat of terrorism for the 21st century.

He was killed on May 2, 2011, by American military and C.I.A. operatives who tracked him to a compound in Pakistan.

President Obama announced the death in a televised address to the nation from Washington, where it was still late on the night of May 1.
"Justice has been done,'' he declared.

The United States had been trying to kill or capture Bin Laden since it launched an invasion of Afghanistan in November 2001.
The next month, he escaped from American and Afghan troops at an Afghan mountain redoubt called Tora Bora, near the border with Pakistan.
For more than nine years afterward, he remained an elusive, shadowy figure frustratingly beyond the grasp of his pursuers and thought to be hiding somewhere in Pakistan's remote tribal areas and plotting new attacks.

When he was hunted down, Bin Laden was killed not in the wilderness but rather in the city of Abbottadad, about an hour’s drive drive north of the capital of Islamabad, raising anew questions about whether the Pakistani intelligence services had played a role in harboring him.

Anatomy of a Successful Raid

Behind the raid that killed Bin Laden lay years of intelligence work.
The turning point came in July 2010, when Pakistanis working for the Central Intelligence Agency drove up behind a white Suzuki navigating the bustling streets near Peshawar and wrote down the car’s license plate.

The man in the car was Bin Laden’s most trusted courier, and over the next month C.I.A. operatives would track him throughout central Pakistan.
Ultimately he led them to a sprawling compound at the end of a long dirt road and surrounded by tall security fences in the wealthy hamlet 35 miles from Islamabad.

On a moonless night eight months later, 79 American commandos in four helicopters descended on the compound.
Shots rang out.
A helicopter stalled and would not take off.
Pakistani authorities, kept in the dark by their allies in Washington, scrambled forces as the American commandos rushed to finish their mission and leave before a confrontation.
Of the five dead, one was a tall, bearded man with a bloodied face and a bullet in his head.
A member of the Navy Seals snapped his picture with a camera and uploaded it to analysts who fed it into a facial recognition program.

In its initial account, the American government said that Bin Laden had been armed while taking part in the fierce firefight that broke out after a team of Navy Seals launched its assault.
That was later revised to say that Bin Laden had been unarmed.

According to the later account, when the Seals reached the compound, they were immediately fired upon by Bin Laden’s trusted courier, Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti.
The commandos killed him and a woman with him.
When the Seals moved into the main house, they saw the courier’s brother, who they believed was preparing to fire a weapon.
They shot and killed him.
Then, as they made their way up the stairs of the house, officials said they killed Bin Laden’s son Khalid as he lunged toward the Seal team.

When the commandos reached the top floor, they entered a room and saw Osama bin Laden with an AK-47 and a Makarov pistol in arm’s reach.
They shot and killed him, as well as wounding a woman with him.

And just like that, history’s most expansive, expensive and exasperating manhunt was over.
The inert frame of Bin Laden, America’s enemy No.
1, was placed in a helicopter for burial at sea, never to be seen or feared again.

Background

Elusive for Nearly a Decade

Long before the Sept.
11th attacks, Bin Laden had become a hero in much of the Islamic world, as much a myth as a man — what a longtime C.I.A. officer called "the North Star" of global terrorism.
He had united disparate militant groups, from Egypt to Chechnya, from Yemen to the Philippines, under the banner of Al Qaeda and his ideal of a borderless brotherhood of radical Islam.

After the attacks, the name of Al Qaeda and the fame of Bin Laden spread like a 21st-century political plague.
Groups calling themselves Al Qaeda, or acting in the name of its cause, attacked American troops in Iraq, bombed tourist spots in Bali and blew up passenger trains in Spain.

To the day of his death, the precise reach of his power remained unknown: how many members Al Qaeda could truly count on; how many countries its cells had penetrated; and whether, as Bin Laden boasted, he sought to arm Al Qaeda with chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.
(His age also was unclear — either 53 or 54.)

[...]

A Terror Network

Through the ’90s, Al Qaeda evolved into a far-flung and loosely connected network of symbiotic relationships: Bin Laden gave affiliated terrorist groups money, training and expertise; they gave him operational cover and a furthering of his cause.
Perhaps the most important of those alliances was with the Taliban, who rose to power in Afghanistan largely on the strength of Bin Laden’s aid, and in turn provided him refuge and a launching pad for holy war.

Long before Sept.
11, though the evidentiary trails were often thin, American officials considered Bin Laden at least in part responsible for the killing of American soldiers in Somalia and in Saudi Arabia; the first attack on the World Trade Center, in 1993; the bombing of the Khobar Towers in Saudi Arabia; and a foiled plot to hijack a dozen jets, crash a plane into the C.I.A. headquarters and kill President Bill Clinton.

In February 1998, he declared it the duty of every Muslim to "kill Americans wherever they are found."
After the bombings of two American Embassies in East Africa in August 1998, President Clinton declared Bin Laden "Public Enemy No.
1.
"The C.I.A. spent much of the next three years hunting Bin Laden.

The goal was to capture him with recruited Afghan agents or to kill him with a precision-guided missile, according to the 2004 report of the 9/11 Commission and the memoirs of George J.
Tenet, director of central intelligence from July 1997 to July 2004.

The Aftermath of 9/11

[See also Case United States, The September 11 2001 Attacks]

Bin Laden had never before claimed or accepted responsibility for terrorist attacks.
In a videotape found in the southern Afghan city of Kandahar weeks after the attacks, he firmly took responsibility for — and reveled in — the horror of Sept.
11.

Continued Operational Role

After reviewing computer files and documents seized at the compound where he was killed, American intelligence analysts have concluded that the chief of Al Qaeda played a direct role for years in plotting terror attacks from his hide-out.
The documents taken at the Abbottabad compound, according to American officials, show that Bin Laden was in touch regularly with the terror network he created.
With his whereabouts and activities a mystery in recent years, many intelligence analysts and terrorism experts had concluded that he had been relegated to an inspirational figure with little role in current and future Qaeda operations.

The documents include a handwritten notebook from February 2010 that discusses tampering with tracks to derail a train on a bridge, possibly on Christmas, New Year’s Day, the day of the State of the Union address or the 10th anniversary of the Sept.
11, 2001, attacks, officials said.

The world’s most wanted terrorist lived his last five years imprisoned behind the barbed wire and high walls of his home in Abbottabad, Pakistan, his days consumed by dark arts and domesticity.
American officials believe that he spent many hours on the computer, relying on couriers to bring him thumb drives packed with information from the outside world.

C.
The New York Times, How Osama bin Laden was Located and Killed


[Source: The New York Times, How Osama bin Laden was Located and Killed, http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/05/02/world/asia/abbottabad-map-of-where-osama-bin-laden-was-killed.html?scp=11=osama%20bin%20laden=cse]


After nearly a decade of hunting Osama bin Laden, a breakthrough came in August of 2010 when Bin Laden’s most trusted courier was located and identified.
What followed was eight months of painstaking intelligence work, culminating in a helicopter assault in Abbottabad, Pakistan by American military and intelligence operatives that ended in the death of Bin Laden.

How the Raid Unfolded In the days after the raid, officials gave some conflicting details of the operation.
Here is a sequence of events compiled from the most current accounts given by American officials.

1 Operation Begins

Four helicopters carrying 79 Americans leave from Jalalabad, Afghanistan.

2 Crash

Around 1 a.m.
Pakistan time, high walls and high temperatures cause the first helicopter to descend faster than expected.
Its tail hits a wall and snaps off, but no one is hurt.

3 Change of Plans

A second helicopter was supposed to hover over the main building while Seal members rappelled down to the roof, but it lands on the ground as well.

4 Firefight

Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti, Osama bin Laden’s courier, opens fire from behind a door of the guesthouse.
Commandos kill the courier.
His wife is caught in the cross-fire and killed.

5 In the Main Building

The commandos blow open the front door of the main house as well as a brick wall behind it.
On the first floor, they see the courier’s brother, who they believe is preparing to fire a weapon.
They shoot and kill him.

6 On the Way Up

As they make their way up the stairs, they kill Bin Laden’s son Khalid as he lunges toward the Seal team.

7 Bin Laden Killed

When the commandos reach Bin Laden’s room on the third floor, an AK-47 and a Makarov pistol are seen in arm’s reach of Bin Laden.
A commando shoots Bin Laden in the left eye and chest, killing him.
Bin Laden’s wife lunges at a commando and is shot in the leg but not killed.

Mission Time

The Seal team is on the ground for an estimated 38 minutes.
Bin Laden is killed about 20 minutes into the raid.

Verification

The Seal team takes a photograph of Bin Laden’s face and transmits it to American officials.
Bin Laden’s remains are flown first to Afghanistan, then to the aircraft carrier Carl Vinson in the North Arabian Sea.
He is buried at sea within 12 hours of his death.

Others in the Compound

Three women and nine children are taken away from the compound by the Pakistani military, who arrive after the raid.

Items Seized

The Seal team removes about 100 thumb drives, DVDs, computer disks, 10 computer hard drives, five computers and piles of paper documents from the house.

D.
The Daily Mail, Guantanamo torture was the key: Detainees led the CIA to Bin Laden's hideout


[Source: The Daily Mail, Guantanamo torture was the key: Detainees led the CIA to Bin Laden's hideout, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1382893/Osama-Bin-Laden-dead-CIA-led-hideout-Guantanamo-detainees.html]


Detainees at Guantanamo Bay provided the crucial breakthrough in hunting down Osama Bin Laden, American officials said last night.

Senior officials in the Obama administration said intelligence gained from interrogations at the U.S. base was directly responsible for helping security forces track down and kill Bin Laden.
The claim will fuel the international row about the Guantanamo camp – one of the most controversial legacies of the 9/11 attacks on the U.S. – and whether torture can ever be justified.

Hundreds of suspects rounded up in Afghanistan and Pakistan were subjected to techniques such as water-boarding, sleep deprivation, white noise and stress positions at the U.S. Naval base in Cuba.
Human rights groups claim the techniques amounted to torture, and that many of the detainees had no link to terrorism.

But U.S. officials said interrogations had produced crucial information about a trusted courier who provided support to Bin Laden after he fled Afghanistan.
A senior source said detainees had provided the courier’s nickname and indicated he could be living with Bin Laden – although it took years to track down his true identity and location.
The official said: ‘Detainees flagged for us individuals who may have been providing direct support to Bin Laden and his deputy after their escape from Afghanistan.
One courier in particular had our constant attention.’

Documents released by the Wikileaks organisation appear to confirm that detainees provided information about a courier operating out of the Pakistani city of Abbottabad, where Bin Laden was eventually tracked down – although it is unclear whether the individual involved is the one who eventually led U.S. intelligence to the lair of the terrorist mastermind.
Mike Blakemore, of the human rights group Amnesty International, last night said torture could not be justified in any circumstances.

‘Torture is repugnant, immoral and illegal,’ he said.
‘It’s never justifiable and no one should be trying to use tracking down Osama Bin Laden or anything else to try to say torture is acceptable.
Whatever is claimed, it is also hopelessly unreliable as a source of information – someone being tortured will say anything to try to make their suffering stop.’

E.
Washington Post, CIA Myth that Torture Led to Bin Laden Is Finally Dead


[Source: The Washington Post, "CIA Myth that Torture Led to Bin Laden Is Finally Dead", 12 May 2015, available at http://www.washingtonsblog.com/2015/05/cia-myth-that-torture-led-to-bin-laden-is-finally-dead.html]


Pulitzer-prize winning reporter Seymour Hersh’s new report shreds the CIA’s claim that torture led the U.S. getting bin Laden.

Specifically, Hersh reports – and NBC news confirms – that it was not information gained through torture which pinpointed Bin Laden’s location.
Rather, it was a voluntary tip from Pakistani intelligence.

A spokesman for the National Security Council (Tommy Vietor) said in 2011: "The bottom line is this: If we had some kind of smoking-gun intelligence from waterboarding in 2003, we would have taken out Osama bin Laden in 2003."

We’ve previously documented that former CIA director Leon Panetta, current CIA director John Brennan (when he was White House deputy national security advisor), former SecDef Donald Rumsfeld, Senator Lindsey Graham, Senator John McCain and many others say that torture did NOT help get Bin Laden.

F.
Seymour Hersh, The Killing of Osama bin Laden


[Source: Seymour Hersh, "The Killing of Osama bin Laden", London Review of Books, Vol.
37, No.
10, 21 May 2015, available at http://www.lrb.co.uk/v37/n10/seymour-m-hersh/the-killing-of-osama-bin-laden]


It’s been four years since a group of US Navy Seals assassinated Osama bin Laden in a night raid on a high-walled compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan.
[…] The White House still maintains that the mission was an all-American affair, and that the senior generals of Pakistan’s army and Inter-Services Intelligence agency (ISI) were not told of the raid in advance.
This is false, as are many other elements of the Obama administration’s account.
[…]

The most blatant lie was that Pakistan’s two most senior military leaders – General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, chief of the army staff, and General Ahmed Shuja Pasha, director general of the ISI – were never informed of the US mission.
[…]

The major US source for the account that follows is a retired senior intelligence official who was knowledgeable about the initial intelligence about bin Laden’s presence in Abbottabad.
He also was privy to many aspects of the Seals’ training for the raid, and to the various after-action reports.
[…]

It began with a walk-in.
In August 2010 a former senior Pakistani intelligence officer approached Jonathan Bank, then the CIA’s station chief at the US embassy in Islamabad.
He offered to tell the CIA where to find bin Laden in return for the reward that Washington had offered in 2001.
[…]

The US initially kept what it knew from the Pakistanis.
‘The fear was that if the existence of the source was made known, the Pakistanis themselves would move bin Laden to another location.
So only a very small number of people were read into the source and his story,’ [a] retired official said.
‘The CIA’s first goal was to check out the quality of the informant’s information.’
The compound was put under satellite surveillance.
The CIA rented a house in Abbottabad to use as a forward observation base and staffed it with Pakistani employees and foreign nationals.
Later on, the base would serve as a contact point with the ISI; it attracted little attention because Abbottabad is a holiday spot full of houses rented on short leases.
A psychological profile of the informant was prepared.
(The informant and his family were smuggled out of Pakistan and relocated in the Washington area.
He is now a consultant for the CIA.)

In October, Obama was briefed on the intelligence.
His response was cautious, the retired official said.
‘It just made no sense that bin Laden was living in Abbottabad.
It was just too crazy.
The president’s position was emphatic: "Don’t talk to me about this any more unless you have proof that it really is bin Laden."’
The immediate goal of the CIA leadership and the Joint Special Operations Command was to get Obama’s support.
They believed they would get this if they got DNA evidence, and if they could assure him that a night assault of the compound would carry no risk.
The only way to accomplish both things, the retired official said, ‘was to get the Pakistanis on board’.

During the late autumn of 2010, the US continued to keep quiet about the walk-in, and Kayani and Pasha continued to insist to their American counterparts that they had no information about bin Laden’s whereabouts.
‘The next step was to figure out how to ease Kayani and Pasha into it – to tell them that we’ve got intelligence showing that there is a high-value target in the compound, and to ask them what they know about the target,’ the retired official said.
[...] Bank was also told by the walk-in that bin Laden was very ill, and that early on in his confinement at Abbottabad, the ISI had ordered Amir Aziz, a doctor and a major in the Pakistani army, to move nearby to provide treatment.
[...]

‘It didn’t take long to get the co-operation we needed, because the Pakistanis wanted to ensure the continued release of American military aid […]’ the retired official said.

The bin Laden compound was less than two miles from the Pakistan Military Academy, and a Pakistani army combat battalion headquarters was another mile or so away.
Abbottabad is less than 15 minutes by helicopter from Tarbela Ghazi, an important base for ISI covert operations and the facility where those who guard Pakistan’s nuclear weapons arsenal are trained.
‘Ghazi is why the ISI put bin Laden in Abbottabad in the first place,’ the retired official said, ‘to keep him under constant supervision.’

Obama was anxious for reassurance that the US was going to get the right man.
The proof was to come in the form of bin Laden’s DNA.
The planners turned for help to Kayani and Pasha, who asked Aziz to obtain the specimens.
[…] [T]he retired official told me that Aziz had been rewarded with a share of the $25 million reward the US had put up because the DNA sample had showed conclusively that it was bin Laden in Abbottabad.
[…]

Bargaining continued over the way the mission would be executed.
‘Kayani eventually tells us yes, but he says you can’t have a big strike force.
You have to come in lean and mean.
And you have to kill him, or there is no deal,’ the retired official said.
The agreement was struck by the end of January 2011, and Joint Special Operations Command prepared a list of questions to be answered by the Pakistanis: ‘How can we be assured of no outside intervention?
What are the defences inside the compound and its exact dimensions?
Where are bin Laden’s rooms and exactly how big are they?
How many steps in the stairway?
Where are the doors to his rooms, and are they reinforced with steel?
How thick?’
The Pakistanis agreed to permit a four-man American cell – a Navy Seal, a CIA case officer and two communications specialists – to set up a liaison office at Tarbela Ghazi for the coming assault.
By then, the military had constructed a mock-up of the compound in Abbottabad at a secret former nuclear test site in Nevada, and an elite Seal team had begun rehearsing for the attack.

Pasha and Kayani were responsible for ensuring that Pakistan’s army and air defence command would not track or engage with the US helicopters used on the mission.
The American cell at Tarbela Ghazi was charged with co-ordinating communications between the ISI, the senior US officers at their command post in Afghanistan, and the two Black Hawk helicopters; the goal was to ensure that no stray Pakistani fighter plane on border patrol spotted the intruders and took action to stop them.
[...]

It was clear to all by this point, the retired official said, that bin Laden would not survive […].

At the Abbottabad compound ISI guards were posted around the clock to keep watch over bin Laden and his wives and children.
They were under orders to leave as soon as they heard the rotors of the US helicopters.
The town was dark: the electricity supply had been cut off on the orders of the ISI hours before the raid began.
One of the Black Hawks crashed inside the walls of the compound, injuring many on board.
‘The guys knew the TOT [time on target] had to be tight because they would wake up the whole town going in,’ the retired official said.
The cockpit of the crashed Black Hawk, with its communication and navigational gear, had to be destroyed by concussion grenades, and this would create a series of explosions and a fire visible for miles.
Two Chinook helicopters had flown from Afghanistan to a nearby Pakistani intelligence base to provide logistical support, and one of them was immediately dispatched to Abbottabad.
But because the helicopter had been equipped with a bladder loaded with extra fuel for the two Black Hawks, it first had to be reconfigured as a troop carrier.
The crash of the Black Hawk and the need to fly in a replacement were nerve-wracking and time-consuming setbacks, but the Seals continued with their mission.
There was no firefight as they moved into the compound; the ISI guards had gone.
‘Everyone in Pakistan has a gun and high-profile, wealthy folks like those who live in Abbottabad have armed bodyguards, and yet there were no weapons in the compound,’ the retired official pointed out.
Had there been any opposition, the team would have been highly vulnerable.
Instead, the retired official said, an ISI liaison officer flying with the Seals guided them into the darkened house and up a staircase to bin Laden’s quarters.
The Seals had been warned by the Pakistanis that heavy steel doors blocked the stairwell on the first and second-floor landings; bin Laden’s rooms were on the third floor.
The Seal squad used explosives to blow the doors open, without injuring anyone.
One of bin Laden’s wives was screaming hysterically and a bullet – perhaps a stray round – struck her knee.

They knew where the target was – third floor, second door on the right,’ the retired official said.
‘Go straight there.
Osama was cowering and retreated into the bedroom.
Two shooters followed him and opened up.
Very simple, very straightforward, very professional hit.’
Some of the Seals were appalled later at the White House’s initial insistence that they had shot bin Laden in self-defence, the retired official said.
‘Six of the Seals’ finest, most experienced NCOs, faced with an unarmed elderly civilian, had to kill him in self-defence?
The house was shabby and bin Laden was living in a cell with bars on the window and barbed wire on the roof.
The rules of engagement were that if bin Laden put up any opposition they were authorised to take lethal action.
But if they suspected he might have some means of opposition, like an explosive vest under his robe, they could also kill him.
So here’s this guy in a mystery robe and they shot him.
It’s not because he was reaching for a weapon.
The rules gave them absolute authority to kill the guy.’
[…] Bin Laden’s wives and children were left for the ISI to interrogate and relocate.

After they killed bin Laden, ‘the Seals were just there, some with physical injuries from the crash, waiting for the relief chopper,’ the retired official said.
‘Twenty tense minutes.
The Black Hawk is still burning.
There are no city lights.
No electricity.
No police.
No fire trucks.
They have no prisoners.’
Bin Laden’s wives and children were left for the ISI to interrogate and relocate.
‘Despite all the talk,’ the retired official continued, there were ‘no garbage bags full of computers and storage devices.
The guys just stuffed some books and papers they found in his room in their backpacks.
The Seals weren’t there because they thought bin Laden was running a command centre for al-Qaida operations, as the White House would later tell the media.
And they were not intelligence experts gathering information inside that house.’

Five days after the raid the Pentagon press corps was provided with a series of videotapes that were said by US officials to have been taken from a large collection the Seals had removed from the compound, along with as many as 15 computers.
Snippets from one of the videos showed a solitary bin Laden looking wan and wrapped in a blanket, watching what appeared to be a video of himself on television.
An unnamed official told reporters that the raid produced a ‘treasure trove … the single largest collection of senior terrorist materials ever’, which would provide vital insights into al-Qaida’s plans.
The official said the material showed that bin Laden ‘remained an active leader in al-Qaida, providing strategic, operational and tactical instructions to the group … He was far from a figurehead [and] continued to direct even tactical details of the group’s management and to encourage plotting’ from what was described as a command-and-control centre in Abbottabad.
‘He was an active player, making the recent operation even more essential for our nation’s security,’ the official said.
The information was so vital, he added, that the administration was setting up an inter-agency task force to process it: ‘He was not simply someone who was penning al-Qaida strategy.
He was throwing operational ideas out there and he was also specifically directing other al-Qaida members.’

These claims were fabrications: there wasn’t much activity for bin Laden to exercise command and control over.
The retired intelligence official said that the CIA’s internal reporting shows that since bin Laden moved to Abbottabad in 2006 only a handful of terrorist attacks could be linked to the remnants of bin Laden’s al-Qaida.
‘We were told at first,’ the retired official said, ‘that the Seals produced garbage bags of stuff and that the community is generating daily intelligence reports out of this stuff.
And then we were told that the community is gathering everything together and needs to translate it.
But nothing has come of it.
Every single thing they have created turns out not to be true.
[…] The ISI took responsibility for the wives and children of bin Laden, none of whom was made available to the US for questioning.

‘Why create the treasure trove story?’
the retired official said.
‘The White House had to give the impression that bin Laden was still operationally important.
Otherwise, why kill him?
A cover story was created – that there was a network of couriers coming and going with memory sticks and instructions.
All to show that bin Laden remained important.’

In July 2011, the Washington Post published what purported to be a summary of some of these materials.
The story’s contradictions were glaring.
It said the documents had resulted in more than four hundred intelligence reports within six weeks; it warned of unspecified al-Qaida plots; and it mentioned arrests of suspects ‘who are named or described in emails that bin Laden received’.
The Post didn’t identify the suspects or reconcile that detail with the administration’s previous assertions that the Abbottabad compound had no internet connection.
Despite their claims that the documents had produced hundreds of reports, the Post also quoted officials saying that their main value wasn’t the actionable intelligence they contained, but that they enabled ‘analysts to construct a more comprehensive portrait of al-Qaida’.

In his address announcing the raid, Obama said that after killing bin Laden the Seals ‘took custody of his body’.
[…] [R]eporters were told that bin Laden’s body had been flown by the Seals to an American military airfield in Jalalabad, Afghanistan, and then straight to the USS Carl Vinson, a supercarrier on routine patrol in the North Arabian Sea.
Bin Laden had then been buried at sea, just hours after his death.
[…]

‘We thought the best way to ensure that his body was given an appropriate Islamic burial,’ Brennan said, ‘was to take those actions that would allow us to do that burial at sea.’
He said ‘appropriate specialists and experts’ were consulted, and that the US military was fully capable of carrying out the burial ‘consistent with Islamic law’.
Brennan didn’t mention that Muslim law calls for the burial service to be conducted in the presence of an imam, and there was no suggestion that one happened to be on board the Carl Vinson.

In a reconstruction of the bin Laden operation for Vanity Fair, Mark Bowden, who spoke to many senior administration officials, wrote that bin Laden’s body was cleaned and photographed at Jalalabad.
Further procedures necessary for a Muslim burial were performed on the carrier, he wrote, ‘with bin Laden’s body being washed again and wrapped in a white shroud.
[…]’.

The Senate Intelligence Committee’s long-delayed report on CIA torture, released last December, documented repeated instances of official lying, and suggested that the CIA’s knowledge of bin Laden’s courier was sketchy at best and predated its use of waterboarding and other forms of torture.
[…] Its major finding – that the use of torture didn’t lead to discovering the truth – had already been the subject of public debate for more than a decade.
Another key finding – that the torture conducted was more brutal than Congress had been told – was risible, given the extent of public reporting and published exposés by former interrogators and retired CIA officers.
The report depicted tortures that were obviously contrary to international law as violations of rules or ‘inappropriate activities’ or, in some cases, ‘management failures’.
Whether the actions described constitute war crimes was not discussed, and the report did not suggest that any of the CIA interrogators or their superiors should be investigated for criminal activity.
The agency faced no meaningful consequences as a result of the report.

[…] The main theme of the committee’s 499-page executive summary is that the CIA lied systematically about the effectiveness of its torture programme in gaining intelligence that would stop future terrorist attacks in the US.
The lies included some vital details about the uncovering of an al-Qaida operative called Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti, who was said to be the key al-Qaida courier, and the subsequent tracking of him to Abbottabad in early 2011.
[…]

In 2005 an internal CIA report on the hunt for bin Laden noted that ‘detainees provide few actionable leads, and we have to consider the possibility that they are creating fictitious characters to distract us or to absolve themselves of direct knowledge about bin Ladin [sic].’
A CIA cable a year later stated that ‘we have had no success in eliciting actionable intelligence on bin Laden’s location from any detainees.’
The report also highlighted several instances of CIA officers, including Panetta, making false statements to Congress and the public about the value of ‘enhanced interrogation techniques’ in the search for bin Laden’s couriers.

G.
Osama bin Laden: statement by the UN Special Rapporteurs on summary executions and on human rights and counter-terrorism


[Source: United Nations, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, available at: http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=10987=E]


GENEVA (6 May 2011) – The Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Christof Heyns, and the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism, Martin Scheinin, have issued the following statement:

Acts of terrorism are the antithesis of human rights, in particular the right to life.
In certain exceptional cases, use of deadly force may be permissible as a measure of last resort in accordance with international standards on the use of force, in order to protect life, including in operations against terrorists.
However, the norm should be that terrorists be dealt with as criminals, through legal processes of arrest, trial and judicially decided punishment.

Actions taken by States in combating terrorism, especially in high profile cases, set precedents for the way in which the right to life will be treated in future instances.

In respect of the recent use of deadly force against Osama bin Laden, the United States of America should disclose the supporting facts to allow an assessment in terms of international human rights law standards.
For instance it will be particularly important to know if the planning of the mission allowed an effort to capture Bin Laden.

It may well be that the questions that are being asked about the operation could be answered, but it is important to get this into the open."
(…)

H.
Harold Koh, Legal Adviser, United States Department of State


[Source: Harold Koh, "The Lawfulness of the U.S. Operation Against Osama bin Laden", Opinio juris, 19 May 2011, available at http://opiniojuris.org/2011/05/19/the-lawfulness-of-the-us-operation-against-osama-bin-laden/]


[…] Given bin Laden’s unquestioned leadership position within al Qaeda and his clear continuing operational role, there can be no question that he was the leader of an enemy force and a legitimate target in our armed conflict with al Qaeda.
In addition, bin Laden continued to pose an imminent threat to the United States that engaged our right to use force, a threat that materials seized during the raid have only further documented.
Under these circumstances, there is no question that he presented a lawful target for the use of lethal force.
By enacting the AUMF, Congress expressly authorized the President to use military force "against … persons [such as bin Laden, whom the President] determines planned, authorized, committed, or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001 …in order to prevent any future acts of international terrorism against the United States by such … persons" (emphasis added).
Moreover, the manner in which the U.S. operation was conducted—taking great pains both to distinguish between legitimate military objectives and civilians and to avoid excessive incidental injury to the latter—followed the principles of distinction and proportionality described above, and was designed specifically to preserve those principles, even if it meant putting U.S. forces in harm’s way.
Finally, consistent with the laws of armed conflict and U.S. military doctrine, the U.S. forces were prepared to capture bin Laden if he had surrendered in a way that they could safely accept.
The laws of armed conflict require acceptance of a genuine offer of surrender that is clearly communicated by the surrendering party and received by the opposing force, under circumstances where it is feasible for the opposing force to accept that offer of surrender.
But where that is not the case, those laws authorize use of lethal force against an enemy belligerent, under the circumstances presented here.

In sum, the United States acted lawfully in carrying out its mission against Osama bin Laden.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = summit
document number 1: 
GCC summit: Second day cancelled amid Qatar row


'The last six months have witnessed a rift in our Gulf home, but we must look to rebuild as the GCC has achieved a great many things, and still has a long road ahead,' said Sheikh Sabah Al Ahmed Al Jaber Al Sabah, who has led mediation efforts on the Doha crisis

The first session of this year's annual Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) summit takes place at Bayan palace in Kuwait City on December 5, 2017.
Giuseppe Cacace / AFP


This year's annual GCC summit closed on Tuesday after just one day of meetings in Kuwait City, with Kuwait's emir saying the council's leaders had managed to calm the situation in a reference to the row between members states the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain, and Qatar.

The summit, which opened on Tuesday, was supposed to last two days but Wednesday's scheduled meetings were cancelled with the closing address coming on Tuesday evening.

"The last six months have witnessed a rift in our Gulf home, but we must look to rebuild as the GCC has achieved a great many things, and still has a long road ahead," said Kuwait's Emir Sheikh Sabah Al Ahmed Al Jaber Al Sabah, who has led mediation efforts on the Doha crisis.

Despite "negative developments and sorrowful events" over the past six months, GCC leaders have managed to calm the situation which is an important step in addressing the recent feud, he added, according to Kuwait's state news agency (Kuna).

"Any dispute on the Gulf level must not affect the continuation of the summit," he said.

_____________

Read more: GCC summit must seek to end Qatar crisis, Kuwait foreign minister says

_____________

Sheikh Sabah called for the formation of a committee to look into modifying the GCC's statute, saying such a step would help the council to continue its leading political role in the Gulf, Kuna reported.

Faisal Al Mutlaqem, of Kuwait’s ministry of communications, had earlier said the two-day agenda for the gathering was set regardless of who attended or what was happening in the region externally, amid reports that the summit would be held for one day only.

Dr Anwar Gargash, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Saudi foreign minister Adel Al Jubeir, Bahrain’s deputy prime minister, Mohammed bin Mubarak, and Oman’s deputy prime minister, Sayyid Fahd bin Mahmoud, had arrived in the Kuwaiti capital on Tuesday morning to take part in the summit, which is normally attended by heads of state.
Qatar's Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad arrived in the city later in the day.




The gathering, which was held behind closed doors, placed Sheikh Tamim in the same room as representatives of the countries that have boycotted Doha since June 5 over its alleged support of extremist groups.

Saudi Arabia, UAE, and Bahrain — all members of the GCC — together with Egypt, have cut all diplomatic and transport ties with Doha.

According to the agenda for the annual meeting, the summit was supposed to have comprised of four sessions.

The first session was scheduled to open at Bayan Palace at 5.30pm, after which representatives were set to attend an official dinner hosted by Sheikh Sabah.

Representatives had then been expected to convene for a second closed session at 11.30am on Wednesday before a joint press conference scheduled for 12.30pm between Kuwait’s first deputy prime minister and foreign minister, Sheikh Sabah Al Khaled Al Hamad Al Sabah, and Abdullatif bin Rashid Al Zayani, secretary general of the GCC.

_____________

Read more:

Sheikh Khalifa forms joint military alliance between UAE and Saudi Arabia

Editorial: The GCC is a symbol of unity and strength in times of trouble



####
document number 2: 
10 Takeaways from the African Union Summit – July 2018


The 31

st

Summit of Heads of State of the African Union held in Nouakchott Mauritania is now over.
The Summit was held under the AU annual theme: "Winning the Fight Against Corruption: A Sustainable Path to Africa’s Transformation."

Decisions of the Summit are not yet publicly available but, as usual, I would like to share with you, the following unofficial summary of the key outcomes of the Summit.

Over the next following weeks, I will be sharing deeper personal analysis on some of the issues discussed in Nouakchott and on the AU agenda.

The Summit meetings were held as follows:


Permanent Representative Committee (Ambassadors): 25

th

– 26

th

June


Executive Council (Ministers of Foreign Affairs): 28

th

– 29

th

June


Assembly (Heads of State and Government): 1

st

– 2

nd

July



The Summit was overshadowed by peace and security issues including the security incidents in the Sahel; the multiple deadly attacks that happened in Mali and Niger while the Summit taking place.
The state of peace and security in the continent was largely discussed by the Assembly including the situation in DRC, CAR, Burundi, Libya, the Sahel, the Horn of Africa etc.
The Peace and Security Council of the AU met at the level of Heads of State in Nouakchott to discuss the situation in South Sudan.
See Communique here.

aperture":"0","credit":"AFP","camera":"","caption":"Mauritania President Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz (6thL) and Rwandan President Paul Kagame, the Chairperson of the Africa Union, stand with delegates and Heads of State for the family photo ahead of the plenary session of the 31st Ordinary Session of the Assembly of African Union (AU) Heads of State and Government in Nouakchott on July 1, 2018.
\/ AFP PHOTO \/ Ahmed OULD MOHAMED OULD ELHADJ","created_timestamp":"1530453227","copyright":"AFP or licensors","focal_length":"0","iso":"0","shutter_speed":"0","title":"MAURITANIA-AU-SUMMIT","orientation":"1"}" data-image-title="MAURITANIA-AU-SUMMIT" data-large-file="https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg?w=680" data-medium-file="https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg?w=600" data-orig-file="https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg" data-orig-size="768,384" data-permalink="https://assodesire.com/2018/07/04/10-takeaways-from-the-african-union-summit/mauritania-au-summit/" sizes="(max-width: 680px) 100vw, 680px" src="https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg" srcset="https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg?w=680 680w, https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg?w=350 350w, https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg?w=600 600w, https://assodesire.files.wordpress.com/2018/07/au-summit-pic.jpg 768w">



####
document number 3: 
'Each Country Can Have Their Own Villa.'
Trump Suggests Hosting 2020 G-7 Summit at His Miami Golf Resort


(Bloomberg) — President Donald Trump said he doesn’t expect to make money if the U.S. hosts next year’s Group of Seven summit at his Trump Doral golf resort, even as he delivered an extended sales pitch to hold the meeting at his Miami property.

"Each country can have their own villa, or their own bungalow" if the meeting is at Doral, Trump said Monday at the end of the G-7 summit in Biarritz, France.
The U.S. is next in the rotation to host the annual meeting of world leaders, which will occur in the middle of the 2020 presidential campaign.
"I don’t want to make any money," said Trump.

Earlier in the day, Trump ticked off advantages of holding a global summit in the Sunshine State of Florida.
"It’s very big," and it’s Miami, "so it’s a great area."
He told German Chancellor Angela Merkel, sitting next to him, that she’d have just a three-minute helicopter ride from the airport to the site.

"People are really liking it," Trump said.

The front entrance to the Trump National Doral is seen on June 1, 2016 in Doral, Florida.


The front entrance to the Trump National Doral is seen on June 1, 2016 in Doral, Florida.

Joe Raedle—Getty Images

The president already has run afoul of ethics experts and faced multiple lawsuits over his continued involvement with some of his private business holdings, such as the Trump International Hotel in Washington.
Locating a global summit on one of his properties would open him up to a slew of new allegations that he’s mixing his private financial gain with his public position as commander-in-chief.

The Trump Organization has donated profit from foreign governments to the U.S. Treasury, part of a bid to counter criticism that Trump may be violating the U.S. Constitution’s emoluments clauses by accepting payments from foreign governments.

Still, Doral would benefit in other ways from hosting a summit of world leaders.
The resort would get free publicity that could boost future profit.

The president placed his business holdings in a revocable trust that lets him continue to profit from his company’s activities.
His sons Eric and Donald Jr. run the Trump Organization.
Democrats and watchdog groups have repeatedly criticized Trump for maintaining his business while in public office.

Doral is built more for play than work, and its website boasts that it’s only eight miles (13 kilometers) from the Miami airport.
It’s 800 acres, boasts four golf courses and 643 rooms, plus more than 100,000 square feet of event space — including the Donald J.
Trump Grand Ballroom.

Doral may have fallen on hard times financially.
Trump’s financial disclosure showed the property had $74.8 million in 2018 income, down from about $115.9 million.

A number of high-profile companies and industry groups have held meetings there since Trump took office, including private prison operator Geo Group Inc., a major beneficiary of Trump’s immigration policies.
Separately, the Community Financial Services Association of America, a payday lenders’ trade group, held an event there in March amid efforts to roll back consumer protections in the industry.



####
document number 4: 
Search and rescue team helps injured hiker off Mt.
Olympus



SALT LAKE CITY — A Salt Lake County Search and Rescue team helped an injured hiker off Mount Olympus Tuesday night.

According to aFacebook post, crews were called out around 7:30 p.m.

A man had hiked up the Mount Olympus trail and at some point tried to take a different route to the summit.

The man slipped and fell around 15 feet near the summit and injured his back.

He was able to call 911.

A SAR team was sent up the main trail and six other members prepared to possibly be flown with equipment to the summit by the Department of Public Safety helicopter.

DPS did a fly over to locate the patient before dark and determined that they could hoist the patient off the mountain.

The patient was flown to the Mount Olympus trailhead and transported to a local hospital.

All other SAR members got off the mountain around 10 p.m.



####
document number 5: 
Macron delivers breakthrough on Iran at tense G7 summit, but little else


BIARRITZ, France (Reuters) - French President Emmanuel Macron paved the way at a G7 summit for a diplomatic solution to the standoff between Washington and Tehran over a 2015 nuclear deal, but there was little else to show from a meeting at which allies were sharply divided.


Macron, host of the summit of seven industrialized nations that ended on Monday in the French seaside resort of Biarritz, said that Iranian President Hassan Rouhani had told him he was open to a meeting with U.S. President Donald Trump.

Trump told a news conference before heading home that it was realistic to envisage a meeting with the Iranian head of government in the coming weeks.
Both leaders are scheduled to attend the United Nations General Assembly next month.

European leaders have struggled to calm a confrontation between Iran and the United States since Trump pulled his country out of Iran’s internationally brokered 2015 nuclear deal last year and reimposed sanctions on the Iranian economy.

"What unites us, and that is a big step forward, is that we not only don’t want Iran to have nuclear weapons, but we also (want to) find the solution to that via political means," German Chancellor Angela Merkel said at the end of the gathering.

Macron has led efforts to defuse tensions, fearing a collapse of the nuclear deal could set the Middle East ablaze.

Trump ruled out lifting sanctions but said talks were underway to see how countries could open credit lines to keep its economy afloat.
He indicated he wanted to address the nuclear deal’s timescale and said he did not want regime change.

"I’m looking at a really good Iran, really strong, we’re not looking for regime change," he said.
"And we’re looking to make Iran rich again, let them be rich, let them do well."

But, apparently referring to Iran’s recent rhetoric about its ability to attack U.S. interests, Trump suggested Iran would meet "violent force" if it followed through on its threats.

FEW CONCRETE RESULTS


Despite the headway made on Iran, the meeting ended with few significant deliverables because there were so many issues dividing the United States and its allies in particular.

These ranged from Washington’s escalating trade war with China, which many fear could tip the slowing world economy into recession, how to deal with North Korea’s nuclear ambitions and the question of whether Russian President Vladimir Putin should be readmitted to the group.

The U.S. president up-ended last year’s G7 summit in Canada, walking out of the meeting early and disassociating himself from the final communique having initially endorsed the document.

Trump said he had got on very well in Biarrtiz with fellow leaders from the group that also comprises Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan.

However, Macron decided ahead of the meeting not to try for a communique after last year’s quarrel, and in the end France issued a terse one-page summit statement that mentioned trade, Iran, Libya, Ukraine and Hong Kong.

Trump offered an olive branch to China after days of intense feuding between the world’s two largest economies over trade that has spooked financial markets and worried his G7 allies.

Washington’s dispute with Beijing escalated last week as both sides leveled more tariffs on each other’s exports.

However, on Monday Trump said he believed China wanted to make a trade deal after it contacted U.S. trade officials overnight to say it wanted to return to the negotiating table.


Slideshow (11 Images)

He hailed Chinese President Xi Jinping as a great leader and said the prospect of talks was a very positive development.

Asked about the White House’s apparent flip-flopping, he said: "It’s the way I negotiate."

NO CONSENSUS ON BRINGING RUSSIA BACK


Trump skipped a summit session on climate change at which they agreed to $20 million technical and financial help for Brazil and its neighbors stop the Amazon forest fires.

Macron said Trump agreed on the initiative but could not attend because of bilateral meeting engagements.

A record number of fires are ravaging the rainforest, many of them in Brazil, drawing international concern because of the Amazon’s importance to the global environment.

Macron said there was no consensus on Trump’s proposal to invite Russia back to what used to be the G8.

Moscow was excluded from the group in 2014 after it annexed Ukraine’s Crimea and then backed an anti-Kiev rebellion in the industrial region of Donbas in eastern Ukraine.

Two European officials said that efforts by summit ‘sherpas’ to agree on statements on global cooperation on artificial intelligence and gender equality were blocked by the U.S. delegation in talks that went into Sunday night.

"Let’s say our sessions have been much harder and longer than previously thought because one delegation blatantly blocked almost everything, showing little will to really negotiate and move forward," said a senior European diplomat, who declined to be named.

U.S. officials were not available to comment on the impasse.





####
document number 6: 
Singapore’s security on high alert for historic Trump-Kim summit after city state spent US$15 million to host


Although Singapore has the experience of hosting high-profile events such as the annual Shangri-La Dialogue security forum, security for Tuesday’s meeting will be on a different scale

Singaporean policemen stand guard at a media centre for the summit.
Photo: Reuters



####
document number 7: 
G7 Summit 2019 – when is the meeting, where is it being hosted and which countries’ leaders are in France?


FRANCE is to host the 45th meeting of seven of the world's most advanced economies.

Here's what you need to know about the most powerful summit on Earth...


Canada will host the 44th meeting of the G7 leaders on June 8 - 9 Credit: EPA


What does the G7 do?


The Group of Seven (G7) is an informal grouping of seven of the world’s advanced economies, as well as the EU and European Commission.

They consist of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States and the presidency rotates every year.

It offers the leaders of these nations to come together and tackle the most challenging global issues of the time.

In the last 40 years, the G7 claims to have "strengthened security policy, mainstreamed climate change and supported disarmament programmes".

The group was previously known as the G8 and counted Russia among its members, but Russia has been excluded since annexing the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine in early 2014.

Where is G7 2019 being hosted?


This year, leaders will gather between August 24-26 in the city of Biarritz in southwestern France.

Talks will take place in a number of venues in the city, including the luxurious Hotel du Palais.

Security for the event is said to be "extremely heavy" and "unprecedented".

Biarritz's airport will be closed to the public from Thursday to Sunday, as will the train station and those of four neighbouring municipalities.

Commuter trains are also cancelled, and a section of a nearby motorway has been rerouted.

Those already in certain areas of the city will also face security cordons.

Which leaders will be at the summit in Canada?



Canadian Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau


French President, Emmanuel Macron


US President, Donald Trump


British Prime Minister, Boris Johnson


Italian Prime Minister, Giuseppe Conte


German Chancellor, Angela Merkel


Japanese Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe


President of the European Council, Donald Tusk



The following leaders have also been invited to attend the summit and participate in some sessions:


Australian Prime Minister, Scott Morrison


Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi


Spanish Prime Minister, Pedro Sanchez



What's on this year's agenda?


On the agenda for this year's summit will be the ongoing trade war between the United States and China, the European-backed nuclear deal with Iran currently opposed by President Trump, and the unrest that continues to unfold in Hong Kong.

The meeting will also be Boris Johnson first major appearance on the world stage since he became prime minister in July.

It will be seen as an opportunity to acquaint himself with world leaders ahead of the UK's EU exit and to discuss alternatives to the current exit deal with EU leaders.

Johnson is also expected to hold a bilateral meeting with President Trump to discuss the relationship between their two countries.

What criticisms have been made of the G7?


G7 gatherings tend to attract thousands of protesters.

In 2018, protest groups in Quebec focused on global trade, the environment, migration, aboriginal rights and a number of other issues.

A coalition organised "a mass demonstration against the G7, capitalism, patriarchy, colonialism, racism and borders".



Many protesters claim the G7 - which has no representative from any African, Russian or Middle Eastern nation - is completely outdated.

Protest groups also use the worldwide platform as a stage to lobby and campaign on issues that are important to them.

We pay for your stories!
Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team?
Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 .
You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502.
We pay for videos too.
Click here to upload yours.



####
document number 8: 
Trump chooses his own Florida resort as site of G-7 gathering of world leaders


WASHINGTON — Acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney announced Thursday that next year's Group of Seven summit of world leaders will be held at President Donald Trump's private Miami-area resort, drawing immediate criticism that Trump is seeking to personally profit from the presidency.

Mulvaney said that roughly a dozen locations were considered for the event — including a location in Hawaii and two in Utah — but Trump National Doral Miami, a golf resort in south Florida owned by the president, won out.

The White House insisted that Trump would not profit off the G-7 meeting, despite widespread concern that hosting the event at one of his private properties violates the emoluments clause of the Constitution.

"This is the perfect physical location to do this," Mulvaney told reporters Thursday, adding that the White House advance team visited multiple potential locations and reported back that it was "almost like they built [Doral] to host this type of event."

Dismissing questions about conflicts of interest, Mulvaney said that the White House used the same criteria to pick a location as past administrations, such as the number of rooms, proximity to airports, medical facilities and landing areas for helicopters.

Mulvaney claimed that hosting the G-7 at Doral would save the government millions of dollars, telling reporters that it would be "roughly 50 percent savings."
He did not provide exact numbers, or say how the government arrived at this determination.
He also said the White House discussed hosting the summit at Doral at no cost, but claimed ultimately it was "not possible."

The president has come under scrutiny throughout his presidency for how often he visits Trump-branded properties, which in turn leads to tax dollars being spent at his businesses.

Let our news meet your inbox.
The news and stories that matters, delivered weekday mornings.

This site is protected by recaptcha Privacy Policy | Terms of Service


The G-7 summit will draw to his property thousands of foreign government officials from Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom, among other invited countries, as well as the international press.

Trump is already facing multiple lawsuits and congressional investigations related to claims that he is profiting off the presidency.
Earlier this week, a federal appeals court revived a lawsuit that challenges his ownership of a luxury hotel in Washington.
In September, Congress launched an investigation into stays by Air Force personnel at Trump's luxury golf resort in Turnberry, Scotland.

House Judiciary Chairman Jerry Nadler, D-N.Y., called Mulvaney's announcement "among the most brazen examples yet of the president's corruption" and said his committee would continue to press for answers about the nature of the selection process.
The panel had announced a probe in August when the president first seriously floated his property as a possible location for the summit.

"He is exploiting his office and making official U.S. government decisions for his personal financial gain.
The Emoluments Clauses of the Constitution exist to prevent exactly this kind of corruption," Nadler said in a statement.

The decision reignited criticism from other Democrats, as well as good-government groups like Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington.

Massachusetts Sen.
Elizabeth Warren, a front-runner for the party's nomination in 2020, called it "corruption, plain and simple."


This is corruption, plain and simple.
https://t.co/NnizsfK0dC— Elizabeth Warren (@ewarren) October 17, 2019


"This is unbelievable," CREW's executive director, Noah Bookbinder, said in a statement.

"The president is now officially using the power of his office to help prop up his struggling golf business," Bookbinder added.

Sen.
Ron Wyden, D-Ore., issued a statement urging foreign governments "to seek accommodation elsewhere," noting that there "is no shortage of hotels in the Miami area."
Wyden also encouraged Congress to "work to defund this effort to force the G-7 to be held elsewhere."

Although Republicans have largely defended the White House's decision,Sen.
Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, expressed disapproval, telling reporters "no" when asked if she thought the Doral was an appropriate choice.

Despite the White House's insistence that Doral is the "perfect" location to host world leaders, the Miami resort was the subject of a 2016 lawsuit brought by Eric Linder, a New Jersey insurance executive, who claimed that he woke up with dozens of bedbug bites while staying there in March of that year.
The resort and Linder settled in a confidential agreement in 2017, The Miami Herald reported.

Additionally, Florida authorities found more than 500 health code violations at the resort between 2013 and 2018, The Daily Beast reported.

The last time the United States hosted the G-7 was in 2012.
President Barack Obama held it at Camp David, a government-owned property in Maryland.

"Why do they hold it at Camp David, I mean seriously?"
Mulvaney said Thursday, calling that summit a "complete disaster."



####
document number 9: 
White House explains why it chose Singapore to host summit with North Korea


If all goes to plan, U.S. President Donald Trump will meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un on June 12 in a tiny but wealthy corner of Southeast Asia.

Trump talks upcoming North Korean summit and Iran



See The Full Clip

3

watch now

The White House explained why Singapore got the nod after experts floated a number of possible locations, including Switzerland, Mongolia and the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.

"Singapore was selected because they have been willing to hold it, and because they have diplomatic relations with both the U.S. and North Korea.
They are one of very few countries that have relationships with both countries," a White House official told CNBC on Thursday.

The city-state of 5.6 million people is an experienced host to major summits involving high-ranking officials from around the world.
In 2015, it was the chosen site for a milestone meeting between Chinese President Xi Jinping and former Taiwanese President Ma Ying-jeou.

Singapore.

Everett Rosenfeld | CNBC

"We did not put our hand up, but we were asked," the country’s minister for foreign affairs, Vivian Balakrishnan, told reporters on Tuesday during a working visit to Washington.

"The Americans approached us first.
The North Koreans subsequently came to us," he added, according to a transcript of the interview.
"I think Singaporeans can be proud.
Proud that we’ve been chosen because they know that we are neutral, reliable, trustworthy and secure."

Restrictions on demonstrations


Singapore has strict laws that limit public demonstrations.
A police permit is needed to hold public assemblies in the country.
A park area known as the Speakers’ Corner in downtown Singapore is the only place where demonstrations can be held without a permit, but other restrictions apply: An approval must be sought and foreigners must not participate.

Trump and Kim will meet on Sentosa, a smaller island off the coast of Singapore’s main island.

When CNBC asked whether limits on protests in Singapore played a role in its choice of Singapore, the White House official said Washington has "conveyed our views and believe in freedom of the press."

"We’re grateful to them for hosting.
[Selecting Singapore] has to do with their willingness and graciousness in hosting and the fact that the North Koreans are willing to do it there," the official added.

A Kim Jong Un impersonator from Australia who uses the name Howard X told Reuters on Friday that he was detained by Singaporean authorities upon arrival at the city’s airport and asked about his "political views."

Singaporean authorities did not have immediate comment on that matter, Reuters said.

Singapore’s security capabilities make it a logical choice for the event, Joshua Kurlantzick, a senior fellow for Southeast Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations, wrote in a Wednesday note.

"The city-state’s diplomatic corps and security and intelligence personnel are highly respected globally and shown repeatedly that they can host a major summit without allowing any significant security or intelligence slip-ups," he said.

— CNBC’s Eamon Javers contributed reporting.



####
document number 10: 
PHOTOS: Highlights Of The Trump-Kim Summit In Singapore


After shaking hands with Kim Jong Un Tuesday morning, President Trump said, "I feel really great.
It's going to be a great discussion and I think tremendous success.
I think it's going to be really successful and I think we will have a terrific relationship.
I have no doubt."


The day began with a historic handshake, the first meeting ever between a sitting U.S. president and a North Korean leader.
As Kim Jong Un and President Trump strode toward each other and clasped hands Tuesday morning at the Capella resort on Singapore's Sentosa Island, it marked a diplomatic milestone — and the start of what seems certain to be a long negotiation process over North Korea's nuclear program.

"I feel really great," the president said after the handshake.

"Well, it was not easy to get here," Kim said.
"Old prejudices and practices worked as obstacles on our way forward.
But we overcame all of them, and we are here today."

The two leaders first sat down for a private meeting, followed by another with their advisers.
In the afternoon, they signed a brief statement calling for peace, committing to recover the remains of U.S. service members from the Korean War and asserting a "firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula."

The subject of North Korea's human rights abuses was not mentioned, and President Trump also announced that the U.S. would stop its longstanding joint military exercises with South Korea, which he called "very provocative."

As the day wrapped up, the president told reporters, "We have developed a very special bond."
But, he acknowledged, "Today is the beginning of an arduous process."

President Trump gestures to reporters as he meets with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Un at the start of the U.S.-North Korea summit in Singapore on Tuesday.




####
document number 11: 
Press Conference on ASEAN-related Summit Meetings and Other Events





Photograph of the Prime Minister holding the press conference


On November 3, 2019, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe held a press conference at Tokyo International Airport (Haneda Airport).

Regarding his attendance to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)-related Summit Meetings and other events, the Prime Minister said,

"For the last seven years, Japan has driven global free trade as a standard-bearer for free trade, such as the TPP11 Agreement (Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership) and the Japan-EU (European Union) EPA (Economic Partnership Agreement) as well as the Japan-U.S. Trade Agreement.
With respect to the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), Japan has taken the lead in negotiations over those seven years, aiming to conclude an ambitious agreement that not merely lowers tariffs, but also sets rules on issues such as electronic commerce and intellectual property.

As great progress has been made, especially in the field of such rule setting, negotiations are reaching the final phase.
While there are several issues to be addressed, Japan intends to continue leading the negations in order to create an economic zone based on free and fair rules that covers a wide region from the Pacific Ocean to the Indian Ocean.

Concerning the South China Sea issue, Japan intends to strongly emphasize the importance of all parties peacefully resolving disputes according to international law, not through force, in order to protect the free and open maritime order based on the rule of law.

With regard to the issue of North Korea, it continues to repeatedly launch ballistic missiles.
Japan intends to emphasize that it is extremely important and necessary for the international community to firmly come together and implement the UN resolutions now, towards the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and urge respective leaders to agree on and implement that.

I also intend to emphasize the importance of an early resolution of the abductions issue, and obtain understanding and support for that."



####
document number 12: 
A global summit to reform the international financial system


Over the summer of 2008 pressure was already building in official circles for a new Bretton Woods-style international conference to restructure the international financial architecture.
A Commonwealth summit in June produced a statement calling for such a conference.
And the discussions on the draft document for the UN’s Financing for Development conference in Doha (slated for December 20008) also have included language calling for such a conference.
Finally in early October, the calls were made publicly by leaders of several big European countries, notably France.
This may be the greatest chance since 1944 to influence the structure of international finance.
This page is aimed at helping civil society coordinate a response to this potential conference.
We will bring you analysis, links to documents and highlight selected events.
If you want to contribute just write to info@brettonwoodsproject.org.

Civil society moves


The IFI watching and debt activist communities and movements have launched a global sign-on letter to governments about the process for a new international financial architecture.
The statement supports the fundamental and far-reaching transformation of the international financial and economic system and a major international conference convened by the UN to review the international financial and monetary architecture, its institutions and its governance, but only if the meeting follows a process that:


is inclusive and participatory of all governments of the world;


includes representatives from civil society, citizen’s groups, social movements and other stakeholders;


has a clear timeline and process for regional consultations, particularly with those most affected by the crisis;


is comprehensive in scope, tackling the full array of issues and institutions;


is transparent, with proposals and draft outcome documents made publicly available and discussed well in advance of the meeting.



The deadline for signatories to this statement is Thursday the 13th of November.
Please endorse the statement using the Choike website: http://www.choike.org/bw2/.

Also on the Choike website is a secondary statement suplementing the above with more concrete demands.

The main topics are:


To create a new set of principles in which finance should be aimed at, and linked to, strengthening national and local real economies to meet the requirement of sustainable and equitable development.


To move away from the market fundamentalism driving the recent past.


To curb the power of the World Bank, the IMF and the WTO, and to enhance the accountability of global, regional and national economic governance institutions.


A call for governments to take immediate action to develop a new international regulatory architecture with democratic checks and balances that is aimed at promoting the interests of workers, small-hold farmers, consumers, and the environment and preventing future financial crises, in which the United Nations should play a central role in its development.



Concrete suggestions include:


regulating derivatives


stopping speculation on staple food commodities


applying stricter international capital reserve requirements


a speculation tax on international transactions


closing tax havens


stronger transparency rules


A renegotiation by governments of the dozens of free trade agreements and bilateral investment treaties that currently ban governments from placing controls on capital flows and applying other sensible conditions to foreign investment and other financial transactions.



Several other NGO networks and movements have produced statements on the financial crisis and their demands for a reformed international financial architecture.
These statements generally focus on the financial sector and financial markets.
But it is expected that more will be forthcoming.
If you have a statement you want included in this list please let us know.


Statement by the Attac network


Statement drafted at the Asia-Europe People’s Forum – casinocrash.org blog site created by IPS and TNI network


Statement by the International Trade Union Confederation



The first week of November will see the release of two sign-on letters on the content of the reforms.
One will be a global sign-on whilst the other will be addressed at the UK government

UK seminar on the financial crisis


On 28 October, more than 40 representatives of NGOs, development organisations, labour unions, think tanks, academia and the media came together in London to discuss how to take forward demands for a fundamental redesign of the international financial system.
The main themes for the day were about creating a system that works to improve people’s live, reduce poverty, and protect the environment.

A seminar report as well as videos and presentations from the day can be found here.
Keep coming back for updates on outcomes and further events.

Latest intelligence


Over the summer of 2008 pressure was already building in official circles for a new Bretton Woods-style international conference to restructure the international financial architecture.
Since, there has been the UN’s Financing for Development conference in Doha (28th November to 2nd December) and the first G20 meeting on the issue (15th November).
These events mark the start of the greatest chance since 1944 to influence the structure of international finance.
For an analysis on the processes of reform read our most recent article ‘International financial architecture: clearing up the mess?’

Washington diverges from New York


For the G20 meeting Bush set the host location as Washington, spurning the offer from the UN general secretary to hold the conference at UN headquarters in New York.
Only the G8 plus some emerging markets (like Brazil, India, China, Argentina, Turkey, South Africa, and Indonesia) and other rich OECD countries (like Australia and South Korea), as well as Saudi Arabia have been invited.
The G8 statement which called for "key leaders" to be invited, made that it was not a truly international summit.

In contrast to the G8 moves, the president of the UN General Assembly has set up a high-level task force to review the global financial system, including major bodies such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in response to the current turmoil that is affecting all countries, large and small.
Miguel D’Escoto has appointed Joseph Stiglitz to chair the panel, which will also suggest steps to be taken by UN members "to secure a more stable global economic order".

If you have more intelligence you would like to share please do make it available.

Background


For more background on the calls for the new conference the best papers are the briefings produced by our colleagues in Belgium and Canada.
See the following:


Bretton Woods II conference FAQs , Eurodad – a guide to what is being planned, what it means, and what civil society groups are demanding


Rethinking the international financial system and its architecture: Calls for a "Bretton Woods II", Halifax Initiative – walks people through the calls that have been made up until mid October 2008.



As of now the following people/forums that have announced support for the new international conference include:


Selected Commonwealth heads of state in the Marlborough House statement


Nicholas Sarkozy, president of France


Gordon Brown, UK prime minister


Angela Merkel, German chancellor


Commonwealth finance ministers in their October 8 statement


Ban Ki-Moon, Secretary General of the United Nations


Supachai Panitchpakdi, UNCTAD Secretary-General


UN Financing for Development (draft outcome document)



Additionally some governments and statements have expressed interest in something less comprehensive than a full international conference involving all countries and external stakeholders.
For example:


The G8 statement of October 15 calls for a meeting of "key leaders"


Pascal Lamy, director-general of the WTO "welcome[d] the construction of what some are calling a new Bretton Woods consensus" according to Livemint/WSJ



Other Useful Links



Vox Eu paper: What G20 leaders must do to stabilise the economy and fix the financial system.
Centre for Economic Policy Research




####
document number 13: 
Chronology of important dates in the EU accession process


Treaty of accession of the Republic of Croatia to the European Union enters into force

9th March 2012 Croatian Parliament ratified Treaty of accession of the Republic of Croatia to the European Union

22nd January 2012 Referendum on Croatian accession to the European Union

9th December 2011 Croatia signed the Treaty of accession to the European Union

1st December 2011 European Parliament gave its consent to Croatia’s EU membership

30th June 2011 EU closed accession negotiations with Croatia

12th February 2008 The Council of the European Union adopted the new Accession Partnership

18 October 2006 "Screening" of legislation concluded

20th October 2005 "Screening" stage of accession negotiations began

3rd October 2005 Accession negotiations launched

1st February 2005 Agreement on Stabilization and Association entered into force

19th January 2005 National Committee as a special working body tasked to monitor the negotiations on the accession of the Republic of Croatia to the European Union established

15th October 2004 Parliamentary Committee for Stabilization and Accession (Croatia – EU Joint Parliamentary Committee) established in the Croatian Parliament

June 2004 European Council confirmed Croatia as candidate country

April 2004 European Commission issued positive opinion on Croatia’s application for EU membership application

21st February 2003 Croatia applied for EU membership

29th October 2001 Stabilization and Accession Agreement signed

November 2000 Zagreb Summit launched the Stabilization and Accession Process for five countries of South-Eastern Europe (Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Macedonia, Albania and Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia)

June 2000 Croatian Parliament established European Integration Committee



####
document number 14: 
London G20 Protest Riots – RBS Attacked, Mounted Riot Police Respond


Tomorrow is the G20 meeting in London, but anti-capitalist protesters got off to a good start today in the City (of London) with an attack on an RBS building.

During my lunch hour I strolled from Moorgate to the Bank of England.
Princes Street was blocked, so I went around Lothbury to Bartholomew Lane, leading to Threadneedle Street.
The protest was on Threadneedle St.
but people attacked the RBS building on the corner.
Mounted police then arrived to push the protesters back.

I was happily taking photos of the march on Threadneedle Street from the safety of Bartholomew Lane.
At about 1.30pm the protesters started getting a bit feisty and obkects were thrown, red smoke bombs were hurled and people started climbing on railings.
The focus quickly turned to an RBS building opposite the Bank of England (the BOE being like a fortress, the protesters did not stand a chance).
Soon a window was broken and protesters managed to enter the building.

Riot (or are they crowd control?)
police started pushing the protesters back, which forced more into Bartholomew Lane, which was still relatively safe.
The tide of the rioting masses ebbed and flowed for a while, until the crowd could no longer hold its position in Threadneedle.
During this time some cunning mounted police officers positioned themselves along the rear of Bartholomew Lane, leaving me (and a whole bunch of other onlookers) trapped between a wall of horse and a rioting mob.

Things were still relatively calm though, but the protesters moved towards the police, and the police commander shouted "visors down!
hold the line!".
They refused to let photographers out.
Things started getting hairy.
Luckily I overheard someone mention a gap in the scaffolding on the opposite side of the street, so I legged it over and made my way along an undercover pathway around the back of the riot police.
The horses were agitated by the time I passed them, and some were backing into the riot vans, shaking them all over the place.
It was only then I realised how damn big those horses are!

But I made my escape, and recorded the whole event on my Google G1 phone, uploaded the photos to Picasa using the Picasa application, and now blogging using WordPress (see how I managed to make it sound like an IT blog?).
Here’s a photo reel of my day.
The crowd shots from above are when the protesters were moving from Liverpool Street to Bank via London Wall.

See our full London City G20 Album Learn more about the London G20 summit



####
document number 15: 
Beyonce Dances With Jay Z at Her ‘Soul Train’-Themed 35th Birthday Party



Boogie on down!
Beyoncé and Jay Z dressed up in ’70s garb and danced at her

Soul Train

-themed 35th birthday party on Monday, September 5.

Beyonce and Jay Z arrive at her Soul Train themed birthday party.


While Queen Bey rocked sparkling one-legged pants and a midriff shirt at her celebration, her rapper husband really got into the spirit of the era with a towering wig, bandanna and military-style jacket (that made him look like rocker Jimi Hendrix) as they did a sexy version of the beloved TV show’s line dance.
Watch the pair get down in the video above!

The singer later changed into hot pants as a cake topped with sparklers was brought out, and the couple’s daughter, Blue Ivy Carter, stole the hearts of partygoers as she wished Beyoncé "Happy birthday, Mommy!"

Guests at the star-studded bash included Beyoncé’s sister Solange Knowles, as well as Usher and his wife, Grace Miguel, Chance the Rapper, Janelle Monae, Alicia Keys and Swizz Beatz, model Chanel Iman, Carmelo and La La Anthony, and former Destiny’s Child members Michelle Williams and Kelly Rowland (who channeled disco queen Donna Summer in a low-cut gold jumpsuit).

The "Hold Up" singer’s birthday weekend kicked off with her and Blue Ivy flying to Camp David in Maryland to spend time with first lady Michelle Obama and her daughters, Sasha and Malia (President Barack Obama was in China for the G-20 summit).

On Sunday, September 4, the Grammy winner and her husband attended the Budweiser Made in America Festival in Philadelphia, where she was spotted chatting with former President Bill Clinton.

Before the first couple of music watched headliners Coldplay perform, Chance The Rapper sang "Happy Birthday" to his "Auntie" Yonce.


Beyoncé took to Instagram on Monday to thank everyone for the birthday wishes.

"I just want to say thank you to everyone for all the beautiful and thoughtful birthday wishes," she wrote.
"I am so fortunate to have the love and support of my family, my friends, and my hive.
We’ve grown up together and you guys continue to inspire and motivate me every day.
I’m so grateful for every challenge, every smile, every tear, every discovery, every sacrifice, every triumph, every stretch mark, every kiss, every scar.
I strive to make you proud.
I love YOOOUUUU!!!"



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = kidnapping
document number 1: 
Third arrest made in connection with kidnapping of British couple in South Africa



The couple live in Cape Town but were kidnapped in the small town of Vryheid in the eastern KwaZulu-Natal province Credit: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images


A third arrest has been made in connection with the kidnapping of a British couple who went missing two weeks ago near a popular holiday spot in southern KwaZulu-Natal province.

Rodney Saunders, 73, and his wife, Rachel, 64, who live in Cape Town and have dual British and South African citizenship, were kidnapped on February 12 near the Bivane dam in the small town of Vryheid.

The pair, who are keen horticulturalists, are believed to have been collecting seeds in the area and assisted BBC programme Gardeners’ World.

Police today confirmed that a 23-year-old man had been arrested alongside Sayfydeen Aslam Del Vecchio, 38, and Fatima Patel, 27 who were arrested on February 16.

Captain Lloyd Ramovha, a spokesman for the Hawks, the special police force investigating the kidnapping, confirmed the latest arrest.


The victims’ vehicle was found in the northern part of the city of Durban and is undergoing forensic investigation Credit: GIANLUIGI GUERCIA/ AFP


He said "investigations pointed" to the man having worked with the other two suspects arrested in the case.

He is being charged with possession of suspected stolen property and kidnapping.
"More arrests are expected to be made," Mr Ramovha added.

Patel and Del Vecchio are understood to have been under surveillance by counter terrorism agents and were allegedly found in possession of Isil recruiting material.

The victims' vehicle was found in the northern part of the city of Durban and is undergoing forensic investigation, said Mr Ramovha.

Police were alerted to the pair's disappearance after their credit cards were used, according to local reports.
Patel and Del Vecchio reportedly visited various shopping centres buying jewellery, camping gear and electronic devices.

The gear was reportedly discovered in a remote hideaway near Eshowe, where Patel and Del Vecchio were arrested.

It is believed that around £20,000 has been withdrawn from their bank account since they vanished.


Patel was on bail after being arrested with her brother, Ebrahim, near Johannesburg during anti-terrorism raids in July 2016 on charges of possessing unlicensed ammunition and explosives.

The twin brothers Brandon-Lee and Tony-Lee Thulsie were arrested at the same time and accused of planning terrorist attacks at the behest of Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil).

Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi, of the Hawks police unit, said that Patel and her partner had been on their radar for a long time.

The British Foreign Office updated its travel advisory this week which cautions travellers about ongoing terror threats from Isil in South Africa.

A spokesman for the British High Commission in Pretoria said that the information about the threat from Isil was already part of the government’s existing travel advice, and not added in connection with the kidnapping."

We are working closely with the South African authorities following the kidnap of two South African-British dual nationals and have offered consular support to the family," an FCO spokesperson said.
"As there is an ongoing investigation we cannot comment further."

The US and Britain warned in 2016 of the possibility of attacks by jihadist extremists in South Africa's major cities but the country has so far been spared the jihadist attacks that have struck several other countries on the continent.

The BBC declined to comment on whether the couple had been working alongside Gardeners' World.



####
document number 2: 
Baltimore City Police Sergeant Arrested On Extortion, Kidnapping Charges After Alleged Dispute Involving Home Improvement Job


BALTIMORE (WJZ) — A Baltimore City Police sergeant assigned to the homicide unit was arrested Thursday in Baltimore County on extortion and kidnapping charges after an alleged dispute involving a home improvement job, according to police.

Baltimore City Police Commissioner Michael Harrison said that there are three other Baltimore homicide detectives allegedly involved in the incident.

Baltimore County Police detectives obtained and served an arrest warrant for James Lloyd, 45, of the 2000 block of Emmanuel Court.

Baltimore Detective Allegedly Threatened, Extorted Contractor After He Was Unhappy With Patio Construction, Court Docs Say

Baltimore County Police said they received information about a dispute involving a home improvement job.

Lloyd, who hired the victim, was unsatisfied with the work and allegedly approached them and demanded a refund, according to police.

During the dispute, Lloyd identified himself as an officer, police said.

At one point, he allegedly made the victim get into his car with him and go to a bank to get a certified check for an agreed amount of refund, according to police.

The victim told police he was in fear of being arrested and complied with Lloyd’s demands.

Lloyd has been suspended without pay, Commissioner Harrison said.

Mayor Jack Young issued the following statement in a news release Thursday about the alleged incident.

"I am utterly sickened and appalled by the allegations against members of the Baltimore Police Department.
I have spoken with Commissioner Harrison and I am fully supportive of the actions he’s taken to address those involved.
Any allegations of illegal acts committed by a member of the department will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
We have a police force full of men and women who take serious their oath to protect and serve.
We will not stand for any members who violate this sacred promise or the public’s trust."


City council president Brandon Scott also issued a statement:

"The alleged behavior outlined in this incident is exactly what erodes trust in the Baltimore Police Department, and highlights exactly why we must be fully committed to systemic reform.
The type of abuse of power reported also undermines our police department’s ability to solve homicides in a city that continues to be plagued with violence.
I’m thankful to Baltimore County for their response and to the Commissioner for taking swift action.
I look forward to the results of the criminal and internal investigations so that all involved can be held fully accountable."


Lloyd is currently in custody awaiting a bail hearing.
Baltimore City Police Internal Affairs is also conducting an administrative investigation into the matter.

If Lloyd is convicted, he faces up to 30 years in prison on the kidnapping charge alone.

According to documents, Lloyd was one of the lead detectives investigating the death of detective Sean Suiter in 2017.

The three detectives have also had their police powers suspended and are assigned to administrative duties, pending an internal investigation.



####
document number 3: 
Kidnap victim seen bound by chains in police video


Newly released video shows New Mexico police officers stopping a van that and finding a woman bound by chains in the back of the vehicle.

Video from one of the officer's cameras shows the woman, identified as Jane Priebe, alive but shaken, with a chain around her neck tethering her to the floor.

'Oh my God, thank you,' she tells the officers, her cuffed hands clenched into fists in front of her.

PLAY


Top Articles by

Daily Mail

Trump reveals Secret Service 'SHOT suspect' after White House lockdown About Connatix V43004






Read More SPONSORED /


Coming Next Skip Ad

More than a year of planning went into the kidnapping, authorities said.
Priebe was stalked by an ex-boyfriend and his companion before they dragged her away from her apartment in Las Vegas in late January.

Scroll down for video




linkBaseURL":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4597440/Police-video-shows-rescue-kidnap-victim-bound-chains.html#v-614943390874552464","isMobile":false,"duration":144000,"src":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/video/mol/2017/06/12/614943390874552464/1024x576_MP4_614943390874552464.mp4","source":"KRQE","playerId":"default","title":"New video shows police rescue of woman in chains","preload":"none","initialVideo":true,"thumbnail":"https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/06/12/22/415F751B00000578-0-image-a-1_1497304731723.jpg","poster":"https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/06/12/22/415F751B00000578-0-image-a-2_1497304732731.jpg","syndicationService":null,"shortURL":"http://dailym.ai/2sgGFAC#v-614943390874552464","plugins":{"social-share":{"embedUrl":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/embed/video/1482721.html"},"autoplay-next-video":{"videos":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/1482721/related-videos.json","countdown_time":10},"ads-setup":{"videoAdServerUrl":"https://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ads?sz=[size]=%2F424397508%2Fdm.video%2Fdm_video_news==s=1=vp=xml_vast3=1=[referrer_url]=[timestamp]","adsEnabled":true,"adsCancelTimeout":15000,"screen":{"width":636,"height":358}},"sources":{"url":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/614943390874552464/video-sources.json"},"flyout":{"viewportOffset":0.4,"switchBack":true,"forceFlyout":{"active":true,"muted":true,"switchBack":false}},"tracking":{"channelShortName":"news","sponsored":null,"referenceId":1482721,"trackingType":"embedded"},"animated-preview":{"data-hd-fps":7,"displayName":null,"data-hd-frame-count":70,"frames":150,"width":636,"src":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/636x382_JPG-SINGLE_891114693591937847.jpg","fps":0,"data-film":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/308x174_JPG_891114693591937847.jpg","data-fps":7,"data-video":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/636x382_MP4_891114693591937847.mp4","data-hd-film":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/636x382_JPG-HD_891114693591937847.jpg","data-hd-frame-width":636,"data-frame-height":172,"data-frame-width":308,"data-frame-count":70,"height":356,"data-hd-frame-height":356},"related-videos":{"videos":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/1482721/related-videos.json"}},"videoId":"614943390874552464","descr":"New Mexico State Police pulled over a van and found a woman chained down by the neck inside","referenceId":1482721,"grapeshot":{"article":{"articleURL":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4597440/Police-video-shows-rescue-kidnap-victim-bound-chains.html"}}}" src="https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/video/mol/2017/06/12/614943390874552464/640x360_MP4_614943390874552464.mp4">




####
document number 4: 
Kidnapped in Mexico: How he survived


He survived a kidnapping in Mexico 02:19


When he saw three masked gunmen running toward him and his friend during a September fishing trip just outside Monterrey, Mexico, Shane Andersen knew exactly what was happening.

"I was about to be kidnapped."

Looking back on that day, Andersen admitted "we were easy pickings."

He had taken up a co-worker's offer to go fishing at a family ranch in the outskirts of Monterrey.
The area is a recreational hot spot for wealthy locals.

"The instant they were in front of my car, they slammed on their brakes and their doors were opening," Andersen said.
Before he could react, he was ushered into a pickup at gunpoint by "three kids."

One person demanded their cell phones and aimed an AR-15 at them, Andersen said.
His armed accomplices followed closely behind.

A former safe haven

As recently as 2005, Monterrey was dubbed the safest city in Latin America by a global consulting firm.
Historically a financial bastion, it was in 2010 that Monterrey became victim to the lawlessness and violence spreading throughout the country.
Soon, parts of Mexico's third-largest city turned into a cartel battleground where grenade attacks, shootouts and kidnappings dominated headlines.

In August 2012, gunmen killed nine people in the Matehuala bar, a well-known drinking and topless-dancing venue.
Just a month before in July 2012, suspected cartel gunmen attacked the offices of the "El Norte" newspaper.
Even quaint and one-time peaceful towns on the outskirts of Monterrey became ghost towns, such as Pesqueria, traditionally a farming and agriculture community of about 20,000 now almost abandoned because of cartel activity.

Ghost towns of Mexico's drug war 02:12


Andersen read the headlines before moving to Monterrey, but that didn't stop him from relocating to the city that he says would train him to be a successful business owner.

"My plan was to open a chain of pizzerias in Latin America.
I just love Latin culture.
I always have," he told CNN.

Rather than worry about the violence he would potentially encounter, he practiced ways of being prepared if something did happen.

When the unthinkable did happen, a year and a half after he moved to Monterrey, Andersen went over what he had practiced.

"I'd been so afraid of being kidnapped, that I thought about everything I'd do if I was kidnapped," he said.
"I'm a geography major and kept track of where we were, using the sun.
We went back to where they were from, in the middle of this vast valley.
There were little pockets of neighborhoods where there were farmers.
It was a farming area filled with guys just like the ones who had taken me."

In fact, the locals appeared so accustomed to seeing kidnapping victims that Andersen said "people saw me, knew what was going on and didn't say anything.
And the cartel guys, they weren't hiding their identity either.
They paraded us like treasure.
Like a trophy deer."

But, officials say, Mexico is generally on an upward trend in terms of security, a U.S. State Department spokesman told CNN.

"Compared to the past 15 years, things are getting better," the spokesman added.

Others see the issue as more complex than that.

According to the Observatorio Nacional Ciudadano, a Mexico-based security and justice organization that keeps track of violent crime and kidnappings, more than 1,300 people were officially reported kidnapped in 2012.
Statistics for 2013 are still being compiled, but through April of last year, 553 people were reported kidnapped.

And that's just the official statistics.
Many more kidnappings are never reported.

Mexico was listed as the country with the most reported kidnappings for ransom in 2013, according to Control Risks, an independent global risk and consultancy group, which according to its website helps organizations around the world "to understand and manage risks and opportunities of operating in complex or hostile environments."

In fact, Mexico had more "sequestros" -- or kidnappings as they're referred to in Spanish -- than even Afghanistan, Colombia or Iraq.
Among the other notable at risk countries for kidnappings were India, Nigeria, Pakistan and Venezuela.

'Your friend just cost you your life'

Nuevo Leon, the Mexican state where Andersen was kidnapped, is not on the list of most at-risk Mexican states, but according to Control Risks, the rise in kidnappings in and around Nuevo Leon was caused by the proliferation of violent crime groups such as Los Zetas and the Gulf Cartel in recent years.
It was teenaged Gulf Cartel operatives who kidnapped Andersen, according to what police told him, he said.

"They were probably low-level guys, but they knew what they were doing, however sloppy their operation was," Andersen said.

Lying face down in the back of their red pickup, Andersen said he would close his eyes, opening them up only when his eyelids trembled in hopes that what he was experiencing was only a bad dream.

"'Don't look at their faces,' I thought, 'Then they'll have to kill you.'
What else?
I didn't know what else, I was too in shock to think straight."

Andersen's co-worker, who was also in the back of the truck with him, laid still like a corpse.
He pretended not to hear Andersen when he asked whether the men were going to kill them.

"I was starting to break, every part of me wanted to break down and cry.
So I turned to prayer and thought about my wife."

The ordeal went on for hours, Andersen said, until eventually the leader of the group crouched down close to his face and said in Spanish, "I give you my word that if you get us our money, we won't kill you.'
Then he handed me the phone, put his gun to my head and told me to call my boss."

Andersen's boss initially thought he was joking, though any semblance of humor faded as soon as one of the gunmen began cursing into the phone.
Meanwhile, Andersen's co-worker had arranged a separate agreement with the kidnappers to give them his expensive car in exchange for his release.
It was on the mission to retrieve the car that Andersen's co-worker managed to escape his kidnappers.

"Your friend just cost you your life," one of them told Andersen upon returning empty-handed.
Andersen said they debated for "awhile" on whether they were going to kill him or continue the kidnapping for ransom.

"A lot of Americans feel that when they visit Mexico for vacation or spend time working there, they are immune to the drug-related violence going on around them because they have nothing to do with it.
The truth is that certain drug cartels and gangs in Mexico stopped caring long ago about staying away from Americans or innocent people in general," drug war analyst Sylvia Longmire told CNN.

"The name of the game is to make as much money as possible, and non-Latino Americans are viewed as lucrative kidnap-and-ransom targets, regardless of how much money they actually have in the bank back home," according to Longmire, whose drug war blog is considered to provide some of the most comprehensive analysis of the security situation in Mexico.

It's that perception among the cartels that might have saved Andersen's life.
His kidnappers decided to go forward with the ransom, but for less than the $20,000 originally demanded.

"While the risk is very high because U.S. victims are more likely to trust and call U.S. law enforcement agencies like the FBI, some won't because they fear for their lives and those of their family members," Longmire added.

Andersen's family says it was working with the FBI on his case.

But what eventually helped bring Andersen home had nothing to do with law enforcement and had everything to do with chance.

An unlikely ally

About halfway through his 36 hours in captivity, while Andersen was being paraded through the rural streets, he met a young boy.
We'll call him Alberto, but that's not his real name.

"For the first time in captivity, I was being treated like a human," he said.
"I started to trust him.
We talked about Xbox and video games.
I asked him about sports, and we talked futbol.
He was the only one I could trust."

Andersen is convinced that it was Alberto's petitioning that kept him alive while ransom negotiations were ongoing.
A small ransom of 80,000 pesos or about $6,000 was provided by Andersen's boss at a remote location in the city, but the kidnappers wanted more.
Andersen said he's convinced they would have killed him had he not offered to get them his wife's nearly $7,000 wedding ring to make up the rest of the latest ransom demands.

They agreed to have the ring dropped off at a neutral location.
Even after they secured the ring, Andersen said his kidnappers made him describe it to them so that he could verify its value and authenticity.
He said they didn't want to take any chances that his wife may have dropped off a ring of lesser value in its place.

"This was my final moment of truth," Andersen said.

The kidnappers then left him in the middle of nowhere to find his way back to his home.

"One of them turned to me and said, 'If you can make it out of here alive, you survived.'
Then they jumped in the truck and tore off down the road."

Still in danger in the heart of cartel country, Andersen says it was Alberto who acted as his guide to get out of the countryside alive.
They hiked across dense forest and trekked upstream of a river several hundred yards before flagging down a bus on the side of the road.

"About 25 minutes later, we arrived at the very city my ransom had been dropped off at an hour earlier.
We walked to the town plaza and formed a plan.
We decided it wasn't feasible for me to make it back using the bus system, so we had to choose a taxi, but many taxi drivers worked for drug traffickers or were kidnappers themselves, so we spotted two older gentleman and hoped they were trustworthy enough to get me back home," Andersen said.

They agreed upon an older looking man, hoping that he would get Andersen home safely.
He said his final goodbye to Alberto, got in the car and prayed to get home.

On the way home, he thought of the young boy who helped get him out alive.
Andersen has had no contact with him since but believes the boy is still alive.

Thirty-six hours after being taken, Andersen was at the door of a friend's house, ringing the bell as a free man.

"I began to sob waiting for the door to be answered, and when I saw a shadow behind the glass, I sobbed harder.
The door opened, and I fell into my friend's arms," he said.

Coming full circle

In the hours after his return home, Mexican investigators showed up at Andersen's home to tell him they knew the teens who abducted him.

"He explained they had kidnapped many people they knew of and more they probably didn't know of and my information was critical in stopping more people from suffering," Andersen said.

Two months later, Andersen said he got a phone call from the anti-kidnapping unit in Mexico alerting them to a news story they thought might interest him.

"There was a 25-year-old woman who had been abducted in broad daylight as she walked with her husband," Andersen said, who is now living back the United States.
"She was held for several days before Mexican authorities went in for an extraction.
They killed all four captors and rescued the woman."

Investigators told him three of the men who died that day were the ones who kidnapped him.

"They were killed on the same dusty earth I was held captive months earlier," he told CNN.



####
document number 5: 
‘El Chapo’ extradited to United States



Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman, one of the most powerful and violent Mexican drug cartel bosses in history, has been extradited to the United States to face murder, drug trafficking and other charges.

Guzman, 59, was being held in Cuidad Juarez, near the Texas border, when a Mexican judge denied the drug lord’s legal efforts to prevent the extradition.
Mexican officials put him on a plane Thursday, January 19, and flew him to Long Island MacArthur Airport in Islip, New York.
He is being held in a Manhattan jail, and will be prosecuted in Brooklyn.

As a condition of the extradition, he faces a maximum sentence of life in prison.


Charges against Guzman were pending in seven different federal court districts across the United States, but the Justice Department decided to prosecute him in New York first.
On Friday, he pleaded not guilty to 17 counts of murder, drug trafficking, money laundering and kidnapping.

The extradition comes after Guzman executed two dramatic escapes from Mexican detention facilities, the first in 2001 and the second in 2015.
Before the second escape, Mexican officials had resisted U.S. extradition.

In the 2001 escape, Guzman climbed into a laundry cart and was rolled out the front door, where he got into the trunk of a waiting car.
He was caught again in 2014 at a beachfront hotel in Mazatlan.

But on July 11, 2015, Guzman escaped from the Altiplano federal prison after his men built an elaborate tunnel that allowed the drug lord to casually descend a ladder that led from a drainage basin in his cell.
At the bottom of the ladder he hopped onto a specially modified motorcycle and rode it nearly a mile away from the prison through a lighted tunnel.
He climbed another ladder, met up with his friends, hopped into an airplane and flew to freedom.

El Chapo" Guzman, center, from a plane to a waiting caravan of SUVs at Long Island MacArthur Airport on Thursday, Jan.
19, 2017, in Ronkonkoma, N.Y.
The infamous drug kingpin who twice escaped from maximum-security prisons in Mexico was extradited at the request of the U.S. to face drug trafficking and other charges, and landed in New York late Thursday, a federal law enforcement official said.
(U.S. law enforcement via AP)" sizes="(max-width: 503px) 100vw, 503px" src="https://themobmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/1-23-17-blog-El-Chapo-AP.jpg" srcset="https://themobmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/1-23-17-blog-El-Chapo-AP.jpg 1600w, https://themobmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/1-23-17-blog-El-Chapo-AP-300x200.jpg 300w, https://themobmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/1-23-17-blog-El-Chapo-AP-768x512.jpg 768w, https://themobmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/1-23-17-blog-El-Chapo-AP-1024x683.jpg 1024w">

Authorities escort Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman, center, following extradition from Mexico to New York January 19, 2017.
(Photo courtesy of Associated Press)



####
document number 6: 
U.S.-led attack on Afghanistan begins


On October 7, 2001, a U.S.-led coalition begins attacks on Taliban-controlled Afghanistan with an intense bombing campaign by American and British forces.
Logistical support was provided by other nations including France, Germany, Australia and Canada and, later, troops were provided by the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance rebels.
The invasion of Afghanistan was the opening salvo in the United States "war on terrorism" and a response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, D.C.

Dubbed "Operation Enduring Freedom" in U.S. military parlance, the invasion of Afghanistan was intended to target terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden’s al-Qaida organization, which was based in the country, as well as the extreme fundamentalist Taliban government that had ruled most of the country since 1996 and supported and protected al-Qaida.
The Taliban, which had imposed its extremist version of Islam on the entire country, also perpetrated countless human rights abuses against its people, especially women, girls and ethnic Hazaras.
During their rule, large numbers of Afghans lived in utter poverty, and as many as 4 million Afghans are thought to have suffered from starvation.

In the weeks prior to the invasion, both the United States and the U.N. Security Council had demanded that the Taliban turn over Osama bin Laden for prosecution.
After deeming the Taliban’s counteroffers unsatisfactory—among them to try bin Laden in an Islamic court—the invasion began with an aerial bombardment of Taliban and al-Qaida installations in Kabul, Kandahar, Jalalabad, Konduz and Mazar-e-Sharif.
Other coalition planes flew in airdrops of humanitarian supplies for Afghan civilians.
The Taliban called the actions "an attack on Islam."
In a taped statement released to the Arabic al-Jazeera television network, Osama bin Laden called for a war against the entire non-Muslim world.

After the air campaign softened Taliban defenses, the coalition began a ground invasion, with Northern Alliance forces providing most of the troops and the U.S. and other nations giving air and ground support.
On November 12, a little over a month after the military action began, Taliban officials and their forces retreated from the capital of Kabul.
By early December, Kandahar, the last Taliban stronghold, had fallen and Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar went into hiding rather than surrender.
Al-Qaida fighters continued to hide out in Afghanistan’s mountainous Tora Bora region, where they were engaged by anti-Taliban Afghan forces, backed by U.S. Special Forces troops.
Al-Qaida soon initiated a truce, which is now believed to have been a ploy to allow Osama bin Laden and other key al-Qaida members time to escape into neighboring Pakistan.
By mid-December, the bunker and cave complex used by al-Qaida at Tora Bora had been captured, but there was no sign of bin Laden.

After Tora Bora, a grand council of Afghan tribal leaders and former exiles was convened under the leadership of Hamid Karzai, who first served as interim leader before becoming the first democratically elected president of Afghanistan on December 7, 2004.
Even as Afghanistan began to take the first steps toward democracy, however, with more than 10,000 U.S. troops in country, al-Qaida and Taliban forces began to regroup in the mountainous border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
They continue to engage U.S. and Afghan troops in guerilla-style warfare and have also been responsible for the deaths of elected government officials and aid workers and the kidnapping of foreigners.
Hundreds of American and coalition soldiers and thousands of Afghans have been killed and wounded in the fighting.

Afghans continue to make up the largest refugee population in the world, though nearly 3 million have returned to Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban, further straining the country’s war-ravaged economy.



####
document number 7: 
Alexei Navalny poisoning: what theatrical assassination attempts reveal about Vladimir Putin’s grip on power in Russia


Alexei Navalny remains in hospital in Germany after he was poisoned in Siberia.


Vladimir Putin’s intelligence and security organs have used a variety of lethal ways over the past few decades to dispatch those who oppose him or the Russian state – an increasingly difficult line to draw.
These murders and attempted murders are often theatrical and laced with morbid messaging.
The recent poisoning of Putin opponent Alexei Navalny with the nerve agent Novichok has again illustrated the Russian president’s willingness to sanction dramatic homicide as a tool of the state.

Putin’s prioritisation of theatrical vengeance – even at the expense of large-scale diplomatic reprisals and biting economic sanctions – reveals both the nature of his regime and his obsession with maintaining and projecting power.

Political assassination during Putin’s reign is in keeping with Soviet and Russian traditions, but the brazenness of the Navalny poisoning and its timing during the swelling Belarus protests shows both continuity and change.
After Stalin’s death in 1953 the Politburo of the Communist Party, not a single person, was the embodiment of the state during the cold war.
Putin has blurred and conflated such distinctions since he assumed power in 2000.

Ruthlessness


Like his Soviet forebears, Putin presides over a declining state in which power intermingles with corruption and extrajudicial murder.
The attempted poisoning of former Russian military intelligence officer and British spy Sergei Skripal in 2018 first introduced Novichok into the British vernacular.
Fellow Russian intelligence officer and British agent Alexander Litvinenko did not survive his poisoning in 2006 with Polonium-210 in a cup of tea.
His murder, according to the official British inquiry, was "probably" approved by Putin personally.

Putin’s well of ruthlessness runs deep, and he has not hidden his willingness to engage in "wet affairs" – such as murders, kidnapping or sabotage.
It would be self-defeating to keep his readiness for vengeance secret: it’s a message he wants those Russians who may get grassroots political inspiration from the protests over the border in Belarus to hear.

When asked about specific killings, Putin routinely evades such questions as deftly as a talented spy evades surveillance.
But when speaking in general terms, Putin has been clear.
Globalsecurity.org and others quoted the Russian leader as threatening that "traitors will kick the bucket, trust me", after Skripal was released in a spy swap in 2010.

Personal attacks on Putin are seen as existential attacks on the Russian state.


Given the melding of leader with state, Putin has increasingly characterised personal disloyalty as a threat to the Russian state.
So although former intelligence turncoats are frequent targets of Putin’s vengeance, victims also include journalists and political rivals, particularly those who investigate, expose, and criticise corruption among Putin and his inner circle.
Navalny’s apparently effective efforts to organise legitimate opposition through the ballot box would be intolerable for any autocrat who is unsure how to govern without complete control.

Soviet poisoning playbook


Although poisoning is arguably the most dramatic form of Russian state-sponsored murder, outspoken Putin critics have been assassinated with more pedestrian means: in politician Boris Nemtsov’s case, four bullets in the back in February 2015.
Likewise, Russian investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya was shot on October 7 2006 – also Putin’s birthday – in her Moscow apartment building.
Such killings could be cynically attributed to unfortunate street crime in a case of implausible denial, but Novichok leaves no room for doubt.

Perceived enemies of the Russian state, like the Soviet Union before it, have met their ends in a dizzying variety of gruesome ways, but why does the fascination with poison endure?
There are tactical and strategic considerations.
An assassin cannot expect a clean getaway after shooting a pedestrian on Waterloo Bridge in London, but a puncture wound with a ricin-tipped umbrella would suffice, as in the case of Bulgarian dissident Georgi Markov’s assassination by Soviet intelligence in 1978.

Today, Soviet-created Novichok has replaced ricin.
It offers the assassin advantages such as stealth and time for escape.
It can be administered by exposure to everyday items such as doorknobs or tea.
It appears in a sleepy city like Salisbury, as in the case of Skripal, or on Navalny’s flight from Siberia.

Additionally, a poison victim suffers, often publicly, yielding strategic effects.
The photographs of the pitiable Litvinenko, hairless, gaunt, suffering in his hospital bed, grimly underscored the intended message.
While any thug can murder with a gun, Soviet and subsequently Russian leaders have made assassination into a dramatic art form.
The use of exotic poisons shows that confrontations with power are not a battle between two people, but rather bring the full resources of the state to bear against an individual, framing the situation as hopeless and futile.
Poison evokes fear that you are never safe, never out of reach.


Choppy waters


Putin is a standard-bearer, rather than a pioneer in the long history of Russian political assassination.
Still, the brazenness of an unambiguous assassination attempt on a figure like Navalny, and the political circumstances in Minsk, matter.
They can be interpreted as the act of a leader whose hand may be feeling unsteady on the rudder of the ship of state.

At the same time, however, recent Russian constitutional reforms have erased any line between leader and the state, and may give Putin the confidence to deal even more harshly with opponents.
But this expanded power has not offered more tools to deal with, or co-opt, the most vocal opponents.
Those who cannot be bribed must be intimidated.
Those who cannot be intimidated must be silenced.

If Putin has successfully manipulated the political process to make himself president for life, the coronavirus has been less cooperative in bending to his will.
Claims of a successful COVID-19 vaccine notwithstanding, Russia’s ineffective response to the pandemic has laid bare the inadequacy of the regime.
With the economic consequences of the pandemic and the oil crisis, combined with general Russian Putin fatigue, opposition to Putin is likely to expand.

Given Putin’s apparent legal impunity, his need to distract from state failures and corruption, and disconcerting Belorussian anti-authoritarian protests on his doorstep, it’s hard to imagine Putin losing his taste for the loathsome theatre of political assassination.



####
document number 8: 
May 18, 2020: KDF: Launched airstrike against Al-Shabaab after Wajir Police post attack


SITUATION

Kenyan Defence Forces (KDF) launched sustained airstrikes overnight targeting Al-Shabaab militants (The Al-Qaeda-linked) in Wajir county which is about 30km from the Kenya-Somalia border.
In response to the attack on a Police post in Khorof Kharar which is currently the terror hotspots in Wajir, an airstrike was launched.

According to a security official, the airstrikes were operated at possible hideouts of the militants.
The Al-Qaeda-linked militants have also looted an armory and made away with three rifles.

Wajir County Commander Thomas Ngeywa said in the interview that the terrorists might have suffered an unknown number of casualties following the airstrikes.
He further stated that "Our counterparts from the KDF launched aerial strikes against the Shabaab militants at night in response to an earlier attack and we suspect they might have suffered heavy casualties in the process,".
The number of casualties is still unknown.
He also said that security forces will step up their war against the Somalia-based terror group.
The number of terror attacks in the region has increased this year

Some officers might have sustained injuries after their vehicle ran over an IEDs (Improvised Explosive Devices) which were planted on the Qarsa-Konton route by militants.

The militants destroyed a Safaricom communication mast in what appeared like a simultaneous attack aimed at disrupting communication in the area during the raid.

CHALLENGE

Harakat al-Shabaab al-Mujahideen (HSM- ‘Mujahideen Youth Movement’ or ‘Movement of Striving Youth’), more commonly known as al-Shabaab, is a terrorist, jihadist fundamentalist group based in East Africa.

Kenya was one of the first places where Al-Qaeda practiced its transnational terrorism.
Al-Shabaab has killed more than 1000 civilians and carried out more than three major and numerous minor attacks in the Kenyan territory,2 by far outnumbering Al-Qaeda’s operations – Garissa University College and the Westgate shopping mall attacks remain the deadliest on Kenyan soil since the 1998 US embassy bombing by Al-Qaeda.
It is now accepted that Al-Shabaab’s strategy to launch attacks in Kenya intended to force the Kenyan Government to pull out of Somalia.
Kenya’s government’s aim to deter these militants from crossing the porous 5 borders between the two countries and kidnapping people – which was affecting tourism, provoked Al-Shabaab to consequently target Kenyan civilians who were now considered legitimate targets, According to CPA UK Briefing paper.

The Kenyan government has introduced the counterterrorism measures which are 4- folds– increase the international and regional cooperation, reform the internal security sector, amend relevant legislation and increase parliamentary oversight, and lastly initiate CVE (Countering Violent Extremism) programs.
After all, the good and effective laws that the Kenyan government thinks they have introduced, still the militants continue to create chaos in the country.
It means or rather is reflected that the new laws are not effective and efficient to fight the issue of terrorism, the hottest topic that is discussed globally on all table conferences.
With brazen terrorist attacks at home and abroad, the Somalia-based Islamist insurgent group has proved resilient despite strategic setbacks in recent years.

The strategies implemented by the Kenyan Government have not deterred Al-Shabaab from carrying out terrorist attacks and continue to pose a threat to Kenya’s national security.
The time has now come that the Government of Kenya should take the help of advanced technology like machine learning and neurosciences to curb the problem of terrorism and improvise its counterterrorism measures.

WHY iCOGNATIVE™?

Kenya has seen an uptick in the number of attacks by Islamist al-Shabab insurgents, including on a base housing U.S. troops.
That has left Kenyans in the northeast of the country very nervous.
Kenya Government has fallen short in implementing initiatives to curb terrorism and groups like Al-Shabaab takes the advantage.
Al- Shabaab association with youths has resulted in their exploitation and seeking this, the Kenyan government has come up with the revised Terrorism act of 2015.
Despite the government has claimed it to be an effective counterterrorism tool there has been a significant rise in arbitrary arrests, the majority of which targeted were young ethnic Somali Kenyans, Imams, and Islamic school, teachers.
Terrorism has a direct and indirect influence on the economic growth of the country.
Terrorism, conflicts, and violence not only destroy the economic growth but also affects the peace and prosperity of the country.
To ensure peace is maintained, the terrorists should be prosecuted without any manipulation and necessary information should be obtained.
Kenya’s counterterrorism personnel need an accurate, fool-proof, and unbeatable forensic method that finds the hidden clues in a suspect’s brain and reveal crime-related information.

iCognative™ launched by Brainwave Science fulfills such requirements of a counterterrorism investigation.
It is the latest and most powerful version of advanced neuroscience-based technology that has been designed and developed in such a fashion that the possibility of human intervention is minimized, and no relevant crime-related information possessed by suspects remains unknown to counterterrorism agencies.

iCognative™ test determines if crime-related information is present or absent in the brain, cutting down the investigative time to a fraction of what it normally may be.

The iCognative™ computer analyzes inputs from the headset and declares the result at the end of a usually 45-minute test.
The result can be "information present" or "information absent."
It signifies that the test subject’s brain does or does not contain the information being shown and then the authorities can proceed accordingly.
iCognative™ is highly applicable in more than 85% of all civil and criminal cases.
As a comparison, the DNA and fingerprints are applicable in only 1-2% of all cases.
iCognative™ is accurate and reliable and is versatile to an unbelievable degree.
Saudi Arabia: Police Bust 2 Human Trafficking Rings; 377 People Arrested iCognative™ is not only applicable to counterterrorism and law enforcement but also equally applicable to immigration, national security, human and drug trafficking, and border security.
It reports no false positives or false negatives.
Unlike other tests like a polygraph, it has no known countermeasures.
It saves costs and efforts because it is easy to deploy, easy to learn, highly customizable, highly portable, non-invasive, and instant.
Counterterrorism agencies, as well as other branches, must deploy iCognative™ to greatly enhance the quality of their interrogations and intelligence gathering.

In the current case of an attack on Wajir village, the investigations team can utilize crime-related information including details of the location and time of the attack (Wajir Village, what area), the types of weapons or ammunition used, the details of the items stolen from the armory (three rifles), description of the perpetrators if seen by any witnesses along with the footage from the scene of the attack, etc., can be used in form of words, phrases or pictures to conduct iCognative™ test on all suspected terrorists hiding in the village, terrorist supporters and sympathizers, as well as financial links, can be uncovered.

When the security of innocent civilians is at stake due to underequipped personnel, lack of accurate intelligence in addition to the porous nature of borders, it reveals to us that there is a need for better technologies and resources that will properly equip law enforcement and national security agencies.
Empower them with iCognative™ technology to ensure that peace and prosperity return to Kenya.

KDF:, KDF:, KDF:, KDF:,KDF:, KDF:, KDF:, KDF:, KDF:



####
document number 9: 
My 977 days held hostage by Somali pirates


One afternoon two years into my captivity, in a dirty villa, I sat up on the mattress and noticed that my guard had left the room.
His rifle lay on a mat.
I considered grabbing it.
The pirates were holding me in Galkacyo, a regional capital in central Somalia.
They told me it was Haradheere, near the coast, but I knew Haradheere had no commercial airport, and at first the pirates would giggle every time we heard passenger planes take off and land.

I had seen the dull and dusty buildings of Galkacyo’s airport as a free man, and now the aircraft noise inspired baroque dreams of freedom – fantasies ranging from a quiet release on the tarmac to a clandestine gathering of Black Hawks and commandos in the dead of night.

My guard, Bashko, came in and noticed the gun.
He picked it up by the muzzle, nimbly, and sat down with a brilliant smile.

"Problem!"
he said, meaning the unattended firearm.


He rested it behind him and munched a stem of khat, a leafy green plant that acts as a stimulant.
His eyes were fervid.
I had just been wondering how many of the guards I could shoot before they shot me.
I smiled.
I was – or had been – a peaceful man.
I didn’t want to kill him, or anyone.
But I was going nuts.

"Michael," Bashko said with good humour.
"If the Americans come, you will be killed."

"I know."

"Why no money?"
he asked, referring to the ransom the pirates had demanded.

I shrugged.

I flew to Somalia in early 2012 to write about a pirate gang jailed in Hamburg.
They had been captured two years earlier when they tried to hijack the MV Taipan, a German cargo ship, near Somalia.
Their marathon trial represented the first proceeding on German soil against any pirate, Somali or otherwise, in more than four centuries.
I had reported on the case for Spiegel Online, where I worked in Berlin, and it seemed to me that a book about the case and some underreported aspects of Somali piracy might be interesting.

I travelled with Ashwin Raman, a Indian-born film-maker, whose documentaries about Afghanistan and Somalia had won several awards.
We had arranged security through Mohammed Sahal Gerlach, a Somali elder, in Berlin.
Gerlach had lived much of his adult life in Germany, but he came from Galkacyo, which had become a latter-day pirate supply town.
Gerlach had good relationships with the dominant Sa’ad clan elders in the region.
He had also guided a German TV correspondent through the same region about eight months before.

During the trial in Hamburg, some of the public defenders had insisted their clients were poor, simple, press-ganged fishermen.
The notion of Somali pirates as frustrated fishermen was a cliche, but it seemed to work in court, where little could be verified about the men.
When we arrived in Somalia, we found this fishing story in common circulation.
We heard it in Hobyo, a pirate nest on the eastern coast where we travelled with a long convoy of guards.
As guests of Gerlach and his Sa’ad clan, we interviewed a boss who called himself Mustaf Mohammed Sheikh.
He preferred to keep his face wrapped in a keffiyeh and declared himself to be at war with forces of the west.
He said "white people" had attacked Somalia by trawling its coral reefs and dumping poison on its shores.
Some complaints were legitimate – overfishing and illegal dumping are enormous problems along the African coast – but pirates throughout history have piggybacked on romantic social causes, and Somalis were no exception.

"They just want to buy khat," Gerlach told me later.
He was only half-joking.

After 10 days in Somalia we had almost finished our work.
I needed to finish gathering material, but Ashwin had nothing to do and wanted to leave early.
It went against my gut instinct, but because we had agreed to do everything together, and because it might not be safe for me to hide in the hotel by myself, I went to see him off.
The road to the airport could be dangerous, so we talked to Gerlach about security: two aid workers had been kidnapped there a few months before.

Gerlach assured us that we would be safe, and his friend, the regional president, sent a personal car.
A Somali gunman rode with us.
But by then it was too late.
We had been researched.
I pieced this together only months after, when a pirate showed me an image of my own face on his phone.
The pirates had pulled an author photo of mine from an old New York Times interview.
I’m a dual citizen, and I had travelled to Somalia on a German passport; but they knew I was an American writer.

The first cold indication of this scrutiny came at the airport, while we sat around having tea.
We had to wait for the terminal to open.
One of Gerlach’s friends, Yassin, happened to mention my name, and a young Somali man glanced over from a table nearby.

"You are Michael Scott Moore?"

"Yes."

"I have seen you on the internet," he said.
"You are famous."

"I am not," I said, frowning.

After a long delay, Gerlach and I shook hands with Ashwin beside the airstrip and began the drive back to our hotel.
Along a dusty road, which cut between the graves of Somalis killed in the long civil war, a pickup truck mounted with a heavy gun was waiting.

The truck approached with its cannon aimed at our windshield.
A dozen or so men jumped off and swarmed to my car door.
They fired into the air and tried to open the door.
I held it shut, but they cracked my wrist with their Kalashnikovs, pulled me out, and beat me on the head.
Gerlach was also beaten – but not kidnapped – and our gunman in the passenger seat never fired a shot.
My glasses were broken in the dust.
My brain recoiled from what was happening.
Before they fired their weapons I had convinced myself they just wanted to see my papers.
While they dragged me to a waiting car I felt a reflexive horror for my family and the burden I was about to become.
I wanted to rewind everything.

We drove, first, to a house on the edge of Galkacyo, where my bag was handed to an angry-looking man who waved us away.
We sped out of town to the east, and I sat with ripped clothes and a bleeding scalp, squeezed into the back seat next to three surly gunmen, bouncing across the bush, for several hours.

"OK, OK," the pirates in the front seat said to me.
"No problem."

The car bounced over a bump so hard that my head hit the roof and left a bloodstain on the fabric.

"Fuck!"
I said and pointed at the blood, cradling the broken wrist in my lap.

At first I spoke mainly in obscenities.

"OK, OK," they said.

Near sundown we arrived at an outdoor camp in a reddish, sandy part of the bush.
The pirates blindfolded me and led me to a foam mattress, which lay in the open beside a crumbling low cliff.
I was dazed and bloodied but aware of other Somali gunmen, and other hostages.
I saw very little.
Without my glasses I am drastically nearsighted, and I spent my entire captivity, more than two and a half years, in a fuzzy state of near-blindness.

The guards handed me bread, a bottle of water and a can of tuna.
That would be my diet for the next several months, along with occasional cooked pasta or rice.
In two months, I would lose about 40 pounds.

"OK Michael?"
one of the guards said.
He was an earnest young Somali with a turban and pale brown skin.
He stood on a rise holding a Kalashnikov; the marbled sky behind him had thin swirls of reddening cloud.

"No," I said after a while.



The photographer, Cynthia E Wood, posted this image in a Facebook group on Michael Scott Moore’s birthday in 2012, after he had been kidnapped.
It became a touchstone image for his friends during his captivity.
Photograph: Cynthia E Wood

For some reason I thought about the things in my backpack.
My sense of self was still intact, like a man who’s just lost his head and wants to put it back on.
"They took my bag," I told the guard.
"Can you ask someone for my bag?
It’s a maroon backpack, it had a camera in it."

"They steal your camera?"

"Yes."

"Thieves!"

I looked at him curiously.
After a while I squinted at all the guards, one at a time, to see if I recognised any from our trip to Hobyo.
They were not the same men.
But if they were Sa’ad pirates, it didn’t matter.
My hosts – meaning Gerlach’s relatives – had turned on me.

The next morning we moved to a house.
The pirates stuffed two other hostages into the car with me and bound our hands.
They were both in their 60s, one African, the other – I thought – a Pacific Islander.
He had cocoa-coloured skin, small piercing eyes, and twin furzes of gray hair sticking out over his ears.
This was Rolly Tambara.
We were about to become good friends.

We drove along the coast that morning until we entered a half-wrecked, filthy house on the edge of a town.
(Later I learned it was Hobyo.)
We spent three nights there in separate rooms.
We sat on thin mattresses, free to walk around but not free to visit the toilet stall without permission.

A Somali man who may have been a livestock doctor came to inspect my wrist.
He declared it "not broken," although pieces of bone moved around under the skin.
He sewed a thin wooden splint around the throbbing joint and said it would heal in three weeks.
(It took six.)
Then I tried to sleep; but before dawn Rolly and I were loaded into a Land Rover and driven across the bush by pirates who seemed to be in a nervous panic.

We drove at random, for several hours, until dark fell.
What I wouldn’t learn for days was that a posse of American helicopters had rescued the two aid workers captured in Galkacyo – Jessica Buchanan and Poul Thisted, an American and a Dane – from a pirate camp in a distant part of the bush the previous night.
Nine Somali guards had been killed.
The kidnappers were different from mine, but the pirate kingpin Mohammed Garfanji had financed both abductions.
He lost a relative in the raid.

The Somalis in the front of our Land Rover were agitated.
One of them, who the men called Ahmed Dirie, had rotten teeth and brown, stained-looking eyes.
He seemed to be our guards’ lieutenant – their most immediate, low-ranking boss.
His face looked half-melted with anger and he kept an ammunition belt strapped around his pot belly.
He and his driver, Muse, quizzed me while we drove across the desert bush.

"Are you a marine general?"
said Muse.

"Me?
No."

"Colonel?"

"No," I said.
"I’m a German citizen."

"Ya, ya, ya," said Ahmed Dirie.

They knew I was American, and they thought the Buchanan rescue had something to do with me.
But I would not learn the full story for weeks.
From what I understood of Muse’s Somali, a dozen people had died in some distant town.

"Helicopters!"
said Muse.
"American!"

"Oh boy."

We settled in a dusty wooded valley.
The Somalis let us sit freely, like kindergarteners, on foam mattresses under a tree.
The pirates had cut Rolly’s hair in Hobyo.
Now he looked almost dapper, with a half-bald head and a tough, small, sparkplug frame.

On our first morning in the valley, after a breakfast of cold rice, Rolly started to talk.
He was an old Catholic fisherman from the Seychelles.
Pirates had caught him and his friend Marc three months earlier, in late 2011.
They were cleaning fish on Rolly’s boat about 50 miles from their home port when pirates approached in a skiff under a crackle of gunfire.
The Seychelles’ main island of Mahé lies about 700 miles from Somalia.
Their trip to Hobyo, at gunpoint, took seven days.

Rolly spoke a comical, French-inflected English.
"When I go to fishing," he told me, "I no like to eat fish.
I bring chicken, saucissons, like that."
His boat had been equipped with a stove, and on his first morning as a hostage he tried to cook pork sausage for breakfast.
One of the Somalis noticed.
With his bare foot, from behind, the pirate kicked the sausage overboard.
His Muslim sensibilities were offended by pork sausage.
Rolly still couldn’t believe it.
"They catch you and take you from your home," he said.
"And then they no like what you eat."



A view of Hobyo as Michael Scott Moore and Ashwin Raman visited, with armed guard, in January 2012 Photograph: Ashwin Raman

The pirates had also glanced at the name printed on the rear of Rolly’s boat – Aride, Port Victoria – and declared him "Australian".
They thought that he was too light-skinned to be African.
In fact he was one-quarter Chinese.
"Seychelles, you know, is an island country," he said.
"We are mixed, mixed, mixed."

Ransom for the two men was $20m.
Rolly’s mind seemed to churn through the same trenches of thought every day, and while we lay under thorn trees in the bush he would wince while he made complicated calculations.

"Michael," he would say.
"You know how much is $20m my country?
Is a lot of money.
You can buy house, you can buy car."

"Rolly, with $20m you can found a corporation."

"Heh-heh," he would say.

The nighttime raid by US Navy Seals had rescued Buchanan and Thisted in open savannah, at night, but the Somalis kept us outdoors in the weeks and months that followed.
They boasted on the phone to journalists but took no serious precautions, apart from hiding us under some trees.
"Holding the hostages in one place is unlikely now because we are the next target," a pirate spokesman told the Associated Press in late January – but once we had settled in the wooded valley, Rolly and I spent weeks there, even after a treetop-stirring surveillance flight by an enormous plane (probably an American P-3 Orion).

We moved back to houses in Hobyo after three weeks only because of a rainstorm.
I had the impression that the pirates were making the whole thing up as they went along.
They had no clear plan to extract a ransom or hand me back.
They just made outrageous demands.
Garfani would ask $20m for me.

One night in late February, a month after my capture, the guards hauled me in a Land Rover, alone, to a remote part of the bush to meet the pirate kingpin.
I had heard of Garfanji but never seen a picture.
He was a powerful criminal, with a reputation for cruelty as well as kindness to his own men.

The person I met in the bush that night seemed groggy and dull-witted; he sat cross-legged in the dust and spoke in a high, almost childish voice.
He dialled a private American negotiator on his softly glowing smartphone.

The negotiator said, "The man who just handed you the phone is Mohammed Garfanji," and my blood felt just like ice water.
"They aren’t beating you or anything like that, are they?"
he asked.

"No," I said, although one boss, Ali Duulaay, had beaten me several times.
"Not systematically," is what I meant.

The negotiator’s voice was sane, strong, even good‑humoured.
I had the false idea that somebody was in control.
After a brief conversation he connected me to my mother in California, and hearing her was like hearing music for the first time in weeks.
But the call was fruitless, like most of these ransom conversations.
The pirates wanted too much.
Even the negotiator sounded surprised by "$20 million".

After the call, Garfanji searched his phone for the sound file of a news report about the Buchanan rescue.
He said, in a slurring, apathetic voice:"Your people have killed nine of my people.
If they try it with you, we will shoot you."

"What happened to the hostages?"
I decided to ask.

"They were also killed."

He tapped his phone to start the file and tossed it in the dust.
I heard a clip from what sounded like an Al-Jazeera broadcast, which explained in clear English that two aid workers held captive in Somalia since autumn 2011 had been flown by US helicopters – alive – to the American base in Djibouti.
My heart thumped with glee.

"I’m very sorry to hear that," I told Garfanji, and I think no one in that circle of men had any notion how the phone had made a fool of their proud commander, by revealing his poor command of English.

When we returned to Hobyo that night, I lay awake in the darkened house, under a mosquito net, thinking about the report.
Nine dead pirates would complicate negotiations.
A ransom seemed hopelessly far away.

I tried to imagine a rescue in that house, which seemed to be a half-built pirate villa waiting for a last infusion of cash.
The walls were half a metre thick.
The windows had metal mesh screens instead of glass.
A concrete wall surrounded the house.
A shootout here would be ugly, I thought.

My door to the front porch was flimsy wood, and the guards sat right outside, on a woven mat.
Two or three stayed up all night by chewing khat.
"It is the Somali beer," one of my guards joked.

Khat was far more important to them than the fishing war off the Somali coast.
They chewed it whenever they could, not just at night.
They had to be locked with me in these prison houses like hostages – a separate runner came and went with keys – so nothing excited them more than the daily arrival of fresh bundles of khat.

Most Somalis are Sufis, and chewing khat is one indulgence that sets them apart from the more puritan Salafists in the militant group al-Shabaab.
Some of my guards had even fought against al-Shabaab in Somalia’s civil war that has rumbled on since the federal government first collapsed in 1991.
The men considered fundamentalists to be an alien invasion force, and when they heard news on the radio about a drone strike against a Shabaab leader they would report it to me and hold up their thumbs: "America, good!"

Still, they were quite devout.
Five times a day they took turns on a clean mat and mumbled a prayer towards Mecca.
A Turkish naval officer once told me that pirates by definition were "not Muslim", and he doubted they would observe Ramadan; but the pirates I met were meticulously observant.

One day I asked a guard about his beliefs.
It was a bit like asking a mafia hit man why he went to church, but I wanted to hear it straight from a pirate’s mouth.
"Bashko," I said, "you are a Muslim."

"Yes!"
He was proud.

"But you are also a thief."
I bumped my fingers together, which had become a comprehensible gesture for us.
"No same-same."
These things don’t fit together.

A smile crept over his face as it dawned on him what I’d said.
He laughed and rattled a translation to the other guards.
He straightened up in his chair and tapped his chest.

"I am a Muslim," he said.
"But I am also a thief," he admitted.
"Why?
Because in Somalia, hungry-problem."

"Yes, that’s true."
I held his eyes.
But, I added, "I don’t think Islam works like that."

Bashko was my friend among the guards, a quick-minded, bantam kid in his 20s with clever eyes and a flashing smile.
I wanted long, detailed conversations with him – I wished intensely for a translator – but with our pidgin mix of English and Somali we could only speak in broad terms.

The theological problem nagged him, though, and after a week or two he answered my question.
He said the Koran called for struggle against nonbelievers.
Thieving from infidels therefore was not theft.

"Really?"

"Jews, Christians, Buddhists …" OK to steal from them, he implied.
"Muslim, no."

I shook my head.
"Does the Koran say you can also kill infidels?"
I asked.

"No."
Bashko was adamant.
"All life is sacred under Allah."

One sura, 9:5, the so-called Verse of the Sword, does mention kidnapping, and it is often used as an excuse for hostage-taking and even violent jihad.
But we had no Koran in the prison house.
In fact, I rarely saw the men read.

"But under Allah," I asked Bashko, "it’s OK to steal from other faiths?"

"Yes, it’s in the Koran," he said, and smiled, as if to say there was nothing he could do; the book outranked us both.

For the first few months of 2012 we heard regular surveillance in the air, and the roar of a low-flying Orion plane, every few days, would give me a thrill of reassurance and hope.
It had the opposite effect on my guards.
They wanted me to keep my mouth shut every time a plane came near because they thought sophisticated American listening devices could locate the sound of my voice.

In late March, members of the same pirate gang hijacked a long-line tuna ship off Somalia and anchored it near Hobyo.
Rolly and I had to move onboard in mid-April.
The idea, I think, was that US helicopters would be less likely to descend on a rusted industrial fishing boat filled with two or three dozen hostages than they were on a house or a camp in the bush.
A few weeks later, in May, the pirates moved us back to land for 24 hours.
A gap-toothed and rather stupid pirate called Bakayle said we were about to receive our "plane tickets" home.
That was a bitter joke, and what followed would shape up to be the strangest and most appalling day of my life.



A Somali pirate in front of a hijacked fishing boat in 2012.
Photograph: Farah Abdi Warsameh/AP

We drove through the dry bush for an hour.
The cars made their way to a sloping wooded area where other cars, and other Somalis, waited under the trees.
The men marched Rolly away behind a thicket.
I felt uneasy, but the pirates said, "No problem," and I sat with them for about 20 minutes until one rolled down his window and we heard a harsh voice cry out.

"Rolly!"
the guard said.
They led me to a cluster of tangled trees.
I saw a group of men, heavily armed, with rocket launchers and AK-47s, standing or squatting in the dust.
Some wore turbans and keffiyehs.
Most were older and seemed to be ranking pirates or clan leaders.
They watched me with wary eyes for a reaction, like large predatory cats.
Rolly dangled upside-down from a tree.
They had tied him by the ankles to a heavy bough.
He swung free in nothing but a pair of cotton shorts; his arms flopped like a rag doll’s.
A fat, deep-black man with a high voice whacked him on the chest and feet with a bamboo cane.

It was a torture scene from the days when Ottoman officials would tie the feet of criminals and subject them to "

bastinado

", or public foot-whipping.
Two teenagers filmed it.
Other Somalis ran up to kick Rolly in the ribs.
They seemed to enjoy themselves.
But Rolly didn’t scream again.
He just closed his eyes and let it happen.
I wondered if he was in shock.

The fat man was Mohammed Garfanji.
He handed his cane to another Somali and came up the slope, where he squatted some distance from me and squinted.

"Hello, Michael.
Do you remember me?"
He said Rolly had to be punished because he would not admit to being Israeli.
"But he isn’t Israeli," I said.
"I have found proof on the internet!"
Garfanji blustered.

The man now holding the cane slid it through the cotton knot at Rolly’s feet and used it to turn him this way and that.
Other men kicked him.
I was about to say that Rolly spoke no Hebrew; but that could have led to an awkward line of questioning.
("Have you been to Israel?"
etc) The Somalis I met harboured an unquestioned hatred for Jews.

I decided to say, "He speaks like a man from the Seychelles."

A more junior boss, Ali Duulaay, squatted next to Rolly in the dust with a lit cigarette.
Duulaay had organised both of our kidnappings.
Garfanji was the financier, as far as I understood – he sat at the top of a number of interrelated pirate gangs – but Duulaay was a direct gang leader.

He liked to use his fists, and he’d clobbered Rolly and me several times.
He was lean but strong, about 40, with acne-marked skin.
A little game occurred to him now.
He held the filter end of his cigarette up to Rolly’s upside-down face and taunted him.
"Come on, Rolly," he seemed to be saying, with a smile, trying to slip the cigarette between Rolly’s lips.
"No, Ali, you know I no like cigarettes."
His face looked strained and flushed.

Bakayle taunted the old man about his ransom.
"We will get $50m from your family!"
Rolly didn’t answer, but from that day onwards he would refer to Bakayle as "Fifty Million".
At last the pirates lowered him to the ground.
He lay on his side, propped up on one elbow, to recover his breath.
I went to sit near him and asked the Somalis for food and water.
One guard brought a bottle and box of cookies.
"Are you hungry?"
I said and Rolly nodded.
"Just relax for a while.
I think it’s over."

But now it was my turn.
Garfanji said "these men" in the woods wanted to know why no one had wired them money.
Where was that $20m?
"You’re asking too much," I told him.
"Even you know that."

Garfanji bellowed my answer to the assembled bosses, who hollered their dissatisfaction and shook their weapons.
One looked like Mustaf Mohammed Sheikh, the pirate Ashwin and I had interviewed in Hobyo.
He kept a keffiyeh wrapped around his face, so it was hard to tell; but the resemblance was chilling.

Garfanji said I would be sold to al-Shabaab in one hour if the money wasn’t sent right away.
"They are coming here now!"
he said and I felt a mixture of fear and ashen contempt.

"Well, we don’t have the money," I muttered.
"There just isn’t that much money available."

"You’re lying!
I have looked into your bank account!
I know how much money you have."

His men had stolen a bank card, and I didn’t know whether someone had hacked my account.
"So you know I don’t even have one million, Mohammed," I said.

That tripped him up.
He wanted to accuse me of having more, but from the way he dissembled I gathered he had not cracked my account.

"The American government hasn’t given us any answer," he said.
"These are dangerous men.
They are not satisfied.
How can we find more money?"

"You have my German passport," I said.
"Maybe the German government can help."

I didn’t think it could.
But I was surrounded by armed men and had to say something.
Garfanji shouted my answer to the others and they shook their weapons.
They liked the idea, apparently.
Garfanji suggested a video.
The whole episode, from start to finish, was pirate theatre.
We rehearsed an interview while the cameramen adjusted their tripod and a handful of pirates stepped behind me, holding heavy weapons.
I did not notice them at first.
On the video they are hard to miss; but they were very quiet and I noticed them only at the end, after they stepped away.

Another man insisted I wear a pink blanket over my head, to disguise me from aerial surveillance, so in the video I look not just wretched but ridiculous.
Garfanji played the inquiring journalist.
He bellowed questions from behind the camera.

Afterwards Garfanji stood on a rise of dirt and addressed the men.
He had pretended to mediate between me and this wild gang of bosses; now he rose to his true role as their chief.
He swung the bamboo cane and pontificated.
"Tyrant" was too big a word for him.
He was a play-tyrant, a sadistic bully, and I saw for the first time that Garfanji, this high-voiced overweight child, had flecks of grey in his hair.

The camera team packed up and stopped to apologise to me.
One had small wire glasses and spoke clear English.
"I am sorry," he said.
"We can’t do anything.
We are only journalists.
We will put these videos on the internet."

Within days, in fact, the video would be for sale.
Someone sent an email to Ashwin in Germany, offering to sell the video for $2,000, but he declined.
It ended up on the Somalia Report, a news site, and became the single well-known video from my time as a hostage.
(We made four or five.)

"This wasn’t journalism," I told the teenage cameramen and gestured at Rolly.
"It was humiliation."

"Humanitarian, yes."

"That’s not what I said."

In the autumn of 2012, eight months after my capture, I was moved to a series of barren prison houses in Galkacyo.
I never saw Garfanji, or Rolly, again.
(Rolly and his friend Marc were both ransomed and flown to the Seychelles in November, 2012.)

The pirate now in charge was Dhuxul, an almost bald, almost obese man with deadened eyes and a tuneless voice.
He walked with a limp, on a wooden prosthetic.
He told me his foot had been shot off by American helicopters during the Black Hawk Down incident in Mogadishu in 1993.
That’s not impossible – he was in his late 40s, which is old enough – but the number of pirates I met with physical scars from that disastrous day of violence was implausibly high.

Dhuxul was pronounced "Duhul", a dull and shapeless noise, not so different from the man.
He lived in one of our prison homes, which was unusual.
A high-ranking boss like him tended to keep his distance, rather than sleeping near the hostage.
He kept alcohol and a TV in his room.

On his orders, the men chained my feet every night.
Until then I had not been fettered or tied.
Now, after I finished my typical dinner of boiled beans, a guard would kneel in front of my mattress and wrap my ankles in a bicycle chain.
If he didn’t like my behaviour that day he might tighten the chain; otherwise he’d leave it loose.
I had to be restrained all night, from about six in the evening till the morning call to prayer around five.

There was no clear explanation for this treatment, which started in the spring of 2013.
But the long, 18-month period when my feet had to be chained at night remains as a sodden low point, when something crucial shifted in my spirit.
I had flown to Somalia with curiosity and compassion; I had wanted to show, as far as I could, how Somalis lived and what pirates thought.
With the chains on, I struggled every night with hatred and debilitating rage.
The men treated me like a herd animal.
Around me they smoked, giggled, and bowed to Mecca the way a nomad in the desert might pass days and nights around a camel.

At night I would dream about lively conversation with family friends, in Germany or America, but the dream always ended with the riddle of why I had to return to some kind of jail, and I would wake up to the sight of concrete walls in a house and languid Somalis sitting beside their guns.

A hostage does nothing, but the long hours are a crisis of longing.
My sense of self, in fact my sanity, would surge and ebb.
I tended to wake up in a stark panic and pray for no greater mercy than the dawn.

Rolly had told me that in the first few weeks of captivity, he had considered overdosing on pain pills.
(He was an old man, so the Somalis had been generous with a variety of pills.)
He had learned to pray on his rosary instead.
I coped in other ways.
I was a lapsed Catholic, but I found a Bible to read on the fishing boat.
Yoga helped to calm my churning mind.
I knew my family and colleagues were working to get me out, but thinking about so much money and trouble devoted to the cause of my freedom brought me close to violence.

Suicide would have been easy.
AK-47s lay around like junk.
When I was not with other hostages the notion of grabbing a rifle to shoot a few pirates, and then myself, began to seem not just desirable but moral.
It would have saved a lot of people a great deal of trouble.
It would have spared any Seal team the dizzying risk of a mission.
I steered around the idea on some days only by cold logic, since killing myself would have meant a permanent loss for my family and friends.

What helped was a paradoxical attitude of forgiveness toward the guards.
In different circumstances, Bashko and I would have got on well.
Most of the guards, I had to remember, were just hired hands who deserved punishment far less than the bosses who had plotted my kidnapping.
I also remembered a fierce American essayist called Richard Mitchell, who for some reason was on my mind almost every day.
In one of his books, Mitchell revives the ancient idea, from Epictetus, that a victim suffers only by his own consent.
Self-pity does nothing but heighten the pain.
"To be sick, or to suffer, is inevitable," writes Mitchell, "but to become bitter and vindictive in sickness and suffering, and to surrender to irrationality, supposing yourself the innocent and virtuous victim of the evil intentions of the world, is not inevitable.
The appropriate answer to the question, Why me?
is the other question, Why not me?"

That’s stoicism pure and simple.
It helped in Somalia.
A sense of victimhood in those prison houses was easy to contract, like a contagious disease, and remembering Epictetus – however second-hand – boiled a good deal of neurosis away.

In one Galkacyo house my mosquito tent and mattress lay in front of an open door, facing east.
For months in 2013 I watched the dawn sky lighten every morning through an arabesque arch.
The men watched with their Kalashnikovs from a khat-littered mat on the patio.
When I stirred at night, they objected.
But sometimes I had to urinate before the morning muezzin.

"

Wuuriyaa!

" they said one morning when I started to rise in the dark.

Hey!


I sat up and lifted my mosquito net.
"I have to pee," I said.

One guard aimed a flashlight at my face.
I sat still and held up my chains.

"

Kadi

," I said.

The usual night guard went by a nickname, Madobe.
He was a lean and sarcastic, handsome, simple-minded man who seemed to hate my guts.

"

Kadi

," I insisted, although making any disturbance at night was against the rules.
Madobe lurched forward through the doorway to flick his knuckle into my eye.

"Jesus!"
I shouted.

The noise angered another guard.
He argued with Madobe.
Hitting was against the rules.
They argued in whispers until one of them tossed me the padlock keys, which landed with a clink on the floor.

Madobe liked to abuse me.
He was adept with his knuckle, and sometimes the eye would hurt for a day or two.
That morning I decided to protest his behaviour.
When the chains were off, after dawn, Bashko tried to delivered my usual bowl of beans.

I shook my head.

"No chum-chum?"
he said, using our word for food.

"No," I said.

"Why?"

"Madobe hit me."

Dhuxul woke up, and Bashko translated my complaint.
Other guards upheld my story.
Dhuxul gave the men a phlegmatic order and went out.
He returned for lunch with a hot restaurant meal of spiced rice and boiled goat, in foam trays, for everyone.
The men ate with relish on the patio and Dhuxul placed a plate for me near my pillow, on the floor.

The food smelled delicious, but I didn’t move.
At last Dhuxul made an offer.
Madobe was asleep in the other room, but he would punish him "tonight," Bashko translated.Now would I eat?

Refusing this concession risked punishment.
I had to meet him halfway.
Yes, I told Bashko, after Dhuxul punished Madobe, I would eat.
Not before.
I pushed away the plate.
We would save the rice and goat for tonight.

Dhuxul looked annoyed, but he picked up my chains from a pile on the floor and moved to the other room.
I heard Madobe’s voice.
The chains clinked.
Big deal, I thought – more pirate theatre.
Dhuxul wanted to fake me out.
But the guards on the patio looked concerned.
They moved aside and I saw Madobe in Dhuxul’s clutches, bent forward with his chained hands yanked behind his back.
Dhuxul smacked him across the head.

Naturally my conscience was appalled.
I hated Madobe, but I didn’t like to see him chained and smacked on my account.
The pirates, though, were bent on acquainting me with hunger and confinement, with the prospect of death, above all with the rule of force.
They were acquainting me with Somalia.

"OK Michael?"
Bashko repeated.

The boss had made his concession.
I had to respond.

"OK," I said.

And Madobe quit thwacking me.

Hostages made famous by media coverage grow more expensive, as a rule, so my family made the agonising decision to keep my case quiet.
It was not easy: whenever negotiations faltered, so did my mother’s faith in the tactic, and sometimes she warned negotiators and officials around her that she wanted to tell the world.
The final decision was always hers, and I don’t question it.
The media blackout didn’t shorten my stay in Somalia, but my guards did listen to the radio like eager kids after each video we made in the bush.
They wanted to hear my name on the BBC, and it frustrated them to hear nothing.

"Michael!"

Bashko came to me one day in 2013 with some hot news.

"America – no ransom!"

"No, they won’t pay."
I shook my head in agreement.

"Why?"
he chided.
"America no money?"

He had honestly expected a ransom from Washington.
The optimism made my head swim.
I thought it was well known in kidnapping circles that the US and British governments paid nothing (normally).
Garfanji should have known it before he financed my capture; Bashko should have known it by now.
After I went free, at least one FBI agent would express real surprise that these men were so ignorant of US policy.
But Bashko hardly knew the difference between Britain and France.

Months passed, then years.
The bosses thought I could make them rich while I slept in their houses in chains.
They hit up every conceivable source of cash – governments, families, employers, institutions of any kind.
The demands were outrageous, fanciful, and for a long time I sensed negotiations had stalled.
During one rare phone call with my mother in 2013 I blurted in German that a rescue "would be welcome".
By then I didn’t mind getting killed.
For Bashko it seemed the height of western evil that helicopters might arrive before a fat sack of money; but I was numb to the risks of a rescue, and I imagined, naively, that the US no-ransom policy would require a consistent military response.

My case was particularly difficult.
Two governments had to be prodded for help; two governments had to jostle for command.
I spent 32 months as a hostage, and it is possible that the oscillation between US and German responsibility lengthened my time in Somalia.
In the end I owed my freedom to a ransom cobbled together by my family and a number of US and German institutions.
But it came without warning.
I suppose Bashko did try to tell me; but rumours of a ransom surfaced every month, and I quit paying attention.
The pirates’ wispy gossip and promises of freedom were more maddening than the raw passage of time, so I learned to listen to them with distant bemusement, the way an old man watches TV.

The morning of 23 September 2014, was not unusual.
I woke up in the dark and waited for a guard to toss over keys for my chains.
I undid the padlocks, went for a piss, and came back to face a sullen bowl of beans.

After breakfast I had a phone call with a mysterious American negotiator named Bob.
My Somali translator, Yoonis, let me talk for 30 seconds before he yanked the phone from my hands.
Bob managed to explain exactly nothing.
Yoonis said, "Proof of life, only!"

Around noon I had to use the toilet, and from the high, broken-tiled, sun-shot bathroom I heard the front compound gate open for a car.
That was strange – cars came at night, as a rule.
A young Somali named Hashi stood outside the door with his gun.

"Michael?

Gari

," he said.

Michael, your car is here.

"What

gari

?"
I said.
"I’m busy."

"No problem."

When I came out the men were buzzing with enthusiasm.
Three Somalis were showing off a clear plastic sack of bound hundred-dollar bills.
The bag was sealed.
I couldn’t tell if the bills were real.
"You are going free!"
they said, but I didn’t believe it.
I’d heard it too many times, and I had grown stunted and cramped.
My brain felt like a fish in a swamp.

"You must pack your bags," one of them said.
"You are going to the airport."

I had a bag of dirty clothes.
I threw them together but still wasn’t convinced.
I climbed into the car with two men, Yoonis and another translator.
Normally eight armed men crammed me, blindfolded, into the car.
Not this time.
We drove through Galkacyo – what the men had called Haradheere for almost two years – and out some distance into the bush, where another car waited.

"Get out," said Yoonis.
"You are free."

I felt bewildered but I climbed into the new car and found myself alone with a strange driver, a Somali who spoke American English.
I was still convinced that the promise of freedom was false.
But, to my surprise, he dialled a number while he drove, and on the phone I heard not just Bob, the negotiator, but my mother.

"Where are you?"
I was astonished.
"Not in Galkacyo."

"No, we’re in California," my mother said.

"Your driver will take you to a hotel," Bob explained, "and another Somali will drive you to the airport.
Your pilot’s name is Derek."



Michael Scott Moore.
Photograph: Christian Jungeblodt

Galkacyo’s decrepit Abdullahi Yusuf International Airport, to the northeast of town, was just a dry airstrip with a few low buildings, just like I remembered.
Now, on the asphalt, a small single-engine plane waited.
Next to it stood Derek, a short leathery man in mirrored sunglasses – a bush pilot.
When we pulled next to the plane and I opened the door, he stood under the wing to snap a photo.

"For your mother," Derek said in a British accent.

He shook my hand and gave me a backpack stuffed with clothes.
Derek said he would deliver me to Mogadishu.
From there I would take an American C-130 to Nairobi.
Relief was not quite the word – I was still too shattered to feel relief or excitement or joy – but it seemed incredible to me that Derek could fly a plane.
He was the first competent man I’d met in a long time.

I fastened my seatbelt.
Derek climbed in and slammed his door.
A Somali on the tarmac asked us to wait "just half an hour."

"What for?"
said Derek.

"A journalist is coming, he wants to take your picture," said the Somali.

"No," I told Derek.

I wouldn’t hear for days what was happening in another part of Galkacyo.
The ransom had to be divided.
Everyone connected to me would want a cut of the money.
Within two days several ranking men – including Dhuxul, Ahmed Dirie, and Ali Duulaay – would sit down for a tense meeting in front of a house belonging to a boss called Nuur Jareer.
Duulaay and Ahmed Dirie, my kidnappers, wanted a large share of the $1.6m ransom.
But by now they were outsiders.
They had to demand the money from the sub-group that held me, which included Dhuxul and Nuur Jareer.

Guards at the meeting aimed their weapons in a complicated Mexican standoff, for mutual security, according to people who described the scene to me later.
But the man aiming at Duulaay pulled his trigger.
Gunfire unleashed by the others killed Ahmed Dirie, his brother, and one more of my kidnappers.
Duulaay died on the spot.
The boss Nuur Jareer was injured.
Dhuxul pulled him to safety, but within another three days Nuur Jareer would die of his wounds.

Later I heard the group had invested $2m to hold me.
The top men must have been sorely disappointed.

The plane began to roll forward.
Derek and I put on headsets.
"Galkacyo tower, Galkacyo tower," he radioed.
"Request permission to take off," he said and gave his call sign.
"Two souls on board."

No response.
Another delay.

"Sometimes they don’t answer," he mumbled.

I was still shell-shocked and confused.
My brain would feel cramped for months.
People say, "You must have been overjoyed," but any ransom is a filthy compromise, and I had long ago given up on hope as a dangerous indulgence.
As the plane moved forward, I looked at the cracked and sun-beaten white buildings of the airport – these objects of fantasy for two and a half years – with mute animal wonder.

"Galkacyo tower, Galkacyo tower," Derek repeated.
"Request permission for takeoff.
Two souls onboard."

At last there was some noise from the radio.

"Yes, OK," crackled a Somali voice, and Derek lined up his plane.

America is at a crossroads ...


... and its direction in the coming months will define the country for a generation.
These are perilous times.
Over the last three years, much of what the Guardian holds dear has been threatened – democracy, civility, truth.

The country is at a crossroads.
Science is in a battle with conjecture and instinct to determine policy in the middle of a pandemic.
At the same time, the US is reckoning with centuries of racial injustice – as the White House stokes division along racial lines.
At a time like this, an independent news organisation that fights for truth and holds power to account is not just optional.
It is essential.

Like many news organizations, the Guardian has been significantly impacted by the pandemic.
We rely to an ever greater extent on our readers, both for the moral force to continue doing journalism at a time like this and for the financial strength to facilitate that reporting.

We believe every one of us deserves equal access to fact-based news and analysis.
We’ve decided to keep Guardian journalism free for all readers, regardless of where they live or what they can afford to pay.
This is made possible thanks to the support we receive from readers across America in all 50 states.

As our business model comes under even greater pressure, we’d love your help so that we can carry on our essential work.
If you can, support the Guardian from as little as $1 – and it only takes a minute.
Thank you.



####
document number 10: 
The secret tapes of Jamal Khashoggi's murder


By Jane Corbin BBC Panorama


I walked along a tree-lined street in a quiet area of Istanbul and approached a cream-coloured villa, decked with CCTV cameras.

A year ago, an exiled Saudi journalist took the same journey.
Jamal Khashoggi was caught on CCTV.
It would be the last image of him.

He entered the Saudi consulate and was murdered by an assassination squad.


But the consulate was bugged by Turkish intelligence - the planning and the execution were all recorded.
The tapes have only been heard by very few people.
Two of those people have now spoken exclusively to the BBC's Panorama programme.

British barrister Baroness Helena Kennedy listened to Jamal Khashoggi's dying moments.

"The horror of listening to somebody's voice, the fear in someone's voice, and that you're listening to something live.
It makes a shiver go through your body."

image captionBaroness Helena Kennedy QC


Kennedy made detailed notes of the conversations she heard between members of the Saudi hit squad.

"You can hear them laughing.
It's a chilling business.
They're waiting there knowing that this man is going to come in and he's going to be murdered and cut up."

Kennedy was invited to join a team headed by Agnès Callamard, the UN's special rapporteur for extrajudicial killing.

Callamard, a human rights expert, told me of her determination to use her own mandate to probe the killing, when the UN proved reluctant to mount an international criminal investigation.

image captionAgnès Callamard, UN Special Rapporteur for Extrajudicial Killing


It took her a week to persuade Turkish intelligence to let her and Kennedy, along with their Arabic translator, listen to the tapes.

"The intention clearly on the part of Turkey to give me access, was to help me prove planning and premeditation," she says.

They were able to listen to 45 minutes, extracted from recordings made on two crucial days.

British barrister Helena Kennedy and UN special rapporteur Agnes Callamard describe the Jamal Khashoggi secret tapes


Jamal Khashoggi had been in Istanbul - a city where opponents of regimes across the Middle East have long sought refuge - for a few weeks before he was killed.

The 59-year-old divorced father of four had recently become engaged to Hatice Cengiz, a Turkish academic researcher.

They were hoping to build their life together in this cosmopolitan city, but to remarry, Khashoggi needed his divorce papers.

On 28 September, he and Cengiz visited the Turkish municipal office but were told they needed to get the papers from the Saudi consulate.

"This was the last resort.
He had to go and get those documents from the consulate for us to get officially married because he couldn't go back to his country," Cengiz tells me when I meet her in a cafe.

Hatice Cengiz


Khashoggi hadn't always been an outcast, exiled from his own country.
I met him 15 years ago at the Saudi embassy in London's Mayfair.
He was then at the heart of the Saudi establishment - a smooth-talking aide to the ambassador.

We discussed a recent terror attack by al-Qaeda.
Khashoggi had known its Saudi leader, Osama bin Laden, for decades.
Initially Khashoggi had some sympathy for al-Qaeda's aim to overthrow autocratic Middle Eastern regimes.
But later, he spoke out against the group's atrocities as his views became more liberal and he championed democracy.

Jamal Khashoggi with Jane Corbin in 2004


In 2007, he returned home to edit the pro-government newspaper al-Watan.
But he was fired three years later for what he described as "pushing the boundaries of debate within Saudi society".

By 2011, inspired by the events of the Arab Spring, Khashoggi was speaking out against what he saw as the repressive and autocratic Saudi regime.
By 2017 he had been banned from writing and went into self-imposed exile in America.
His wife was forced to divorce him.

Khashoggi became a contributor for the Washington Post, for whom he wrote 20 hard-hitting columns in the year before he died.

"When he was an editor in the Kingdom he would cross red lines," says his friend David Ignatius, the Post's senior foreign affairs columnist and investigative journalist.
"What I saw with Jamal was that he kept getting himself in trouble by speaking his mind."

Much of Khashoggi's criticism was targeted at the new crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman.

MBS, as he is known, was admired by many in the West.
He was seen as a reformer and moderniser with a new vision for his country.

But at home in Saudi Arabia, he was cracking down on dissent and Khashoggi was highlighting it in the pages of the Post.

Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman


This was not the image the crown prince wanted to project.

"I think that particularly aggravated the crown prince, and he kept asking his aides to do something about this Jamal problem," says Ignatius, who regularly visits Saudi and writes about its politics.

In Istanbul, the Saudis were presented with an opportunity to "do something" about Khashoggi.

On the day of his first visit to the consulate, Cengiz had to remain outside.

She remembers Khashoggi coming out of the building with a smile on his face.
He told her that officials had been surprised to see him and had offered him tea and coffee.

"He said there was nothing to be afraid of, he missed his country so much and breathing that familiar air had made him feel really good."

Khashoggi was told to come back in a few days.

But as soon as he was gone, phone calls were being made back to Riyadh in Saudi Arabia - all recorded by Turkish intelligence.

"What was interesting about this phone call is that it referred to Mr Khashoggi as one of the persons that was being sought," says Callamard.

The first call is believed to have alerted the powerful aide who ran MBS's so-called communications office - Saud al-Qahtani.

"Someone in the communication office had authorised the mission.
It makes sense to see that reference to the communication office as being a reference to Saud al-Qahtani," she continues.

"He has been named directly in various other campaigns against individuals."

Saud al Qahtani


Al-Qahtani had already been accused of involvement in the detention and torture of dissidents in Saudi, such as female activists who dared to drive before the ban was lifted, and high-profile individuals suspected of disloyalty.

In his writings, Khashoggi had accused al-Qahtani of operating a "blacklist" for the crown prince.

"Qahtani began doing extraordinary services - secret black operations," says Ignatius, who has investigated the royal aide.
"That became part of his portfolio and he managed it with a particular ruthlessness."

There are recordings of at least four phone calls on 28 September between the consulate and Riyadh.
These include conversations between the consul general and the head of security at the ministry of foreign affairs, who told him a top-secret mission - "a national duty" - was planned.

There's no doubt in my mind this was a seriously, highly organised mission coming from the top," says Kennedy.

"This was not some flaky, maverick operation on the side."

On the afternoon of 1 October, three Saudi intelligence officers flew into Istanbul.
It's known that two worked in the office of the crown prince.

Callamard believes they were on a reconnaissance mission.

"They probably assess the consulate building, they determine what can and cannot be done."

On a quiet and shady terrace in Istanbul, overlooking the Bosphorus, I meet a former Turkish intelligence officer with 27 years' experience.

Metin Ersöz is an expert on Saudi Arabia and its special operations missions.
He says its intelligence services became more aggressive after Mohammed bin Salman became crown prince.

Metin Ersöz


"They started the kidnapping operations and pressuring dissidents," he says.

"Khashoggi was late in recognising the threat and taking precautions and he would pay a heavy price for it."

In the early hours of 2 October, a private jet landed at Istanbul airport.

On board were nine Saudis - including a forensic pathologist named Dr Salah al-Tubaigy.

Dr Salah al-Tubaigy


After probing their identities and backgrounds, Callamard believes this was the Saudi hit squad.

"The operation was conducted by state officials, they were acting in their official capacities," she says.

Ersöz says that this kind of mission - a special operation - would have needed approval from either the Saudi King or the crown prince.

The Saudis checked into the large and impersonal Mövenpick Hotel, located within a few minutes' walk of the consulate.

Just before 10:00, CCTV shows one of the hit squad entering the Saudi consulate.

From listening to the tapes, Kennedy believes that Maher Abdulaziz Mutreb was the man who ran the operation.

Mutreb was regularly seen travelling with the crown prince, discreetly in the background, close to him as part of his security detail.

"In the calls between the consul general and Mutreb, there's a reference to the fact that 'we received the information Khashoggi will be coming on Tuesday'," says Kennedy.

Later on the morning of 2 October, Khashoggi received a call to come to the consulate for his documents.

As he and Cengiz walked towards the consulate, a macabre and shocking phone conversation was taking place inside between Mutreb and the forensic pathologist, Dr al-Tubaigy.

"He talks about how when he's doing autopsies.
You can hear them laughing," Kennedy says.

"He says, 'I often play music when I'm cutting cadavers.
And sometimes I have a coffee and a cigar at hand.'"

Then the tapes reveal the doctor knows what he is expected to do, according to Kennedy.

"It's the first time in my life, I will have to cut (up) pieces on the ground," she recalls him saying.
"Even if you are a butcher you hang the animal up to do so."

An upstairs office in the consulate had been made ready.
The floor was covered in plastic sheeting.
Local Turkish staff had all been given the day off.

"They speak about… when is Khashoggi to arrive, and they say, 'Has the sacrificial animal arrived?'
That's how they refer to him," says Kennedy.

She is reading to me from her notebook, horror in her voice.

"I remember we walked there hand-in-hand and when we arrived in front of the consulate, Jamal gave me his phones and said, 'See you later darling, wait for me here,'" says Cengiz.

Khashoggi knew his phones would be taken at the entrance and did not want the Saudis to access his private information.

The tapes reveal that he is met by a reception committee and told that there is an Interpol warrant out for his arrest and he must return to Saudi Arabia.

He is heard refusing to text his son to assure the family he is fine.

"There was a point where you can hear Khashoggi moving from being a man who's a confident person, towards a sense of fear - rising anxiety, rising terror - and then knowing that something fatal is about to happen," says Kennedy.

She continues: "There's something absolutely horrifying about the voice changing.
The cruelty of it comes across by listening to the tapes."

Callamard is not sure how aware Khashoggi was of the Saudis' plans: "I don't know whether he thinks he could be killed, but he certainly thinks that they could try to abduct him.
He is asking, 'Are you going to give me an injection?'
to which he's being told 'Yes'."

Kennedy says she heard Khashoggi asking twice whether he is being kidnapped and then saying, 'How could this happen in an embassy?'"

"The sounds that are heard after that point will tend to indicate that he's suffocated.
Probably with a plastic bag over his head," says Callamard.
"His mouth was also closed - violently - maybe with a hand or something else."

Kennedy believes the forensic pathologist now takes over on the orders of the team leader.

"You hear a voice saying, 'Let him cut,' and it sounds like Mutreb.

"Then somebody shouting, 'It's over,' and someone else shouting, 'Take it off, take it off.
Put this on his head.
Wrap it.'
I can only assume that they had removed his head."

For Cengiz, only half an hour had passed since Khashoggi left her outside the consulate.

"During that time, I was dreaming of my future - like how our wedding would be.
We were planning a small ceremony," she says.

About 15:00, CCTV shows consular vehicles leaving and arriving at the consul general's residence two streets away.

Three men enter with suitcases and plastic bags.
Callamard believes they may have contained parts of the body.

A car later drives away.
Khashoggi's body has never been found.

What about the most disturbing detail reported at the time of the murder - the bone saw used to dismember the body?

Kennedy says she did not hear the kind of grating noise she would have associated with that type of surgical instrument on the tape.
But she says there was a low-level humming sound.
Turkish intelligence officials believe this was the sound of the saw.

At 15.53, CCTV shows two members of the hit squad leaving the consulate.

I retraced their footsteps down the street past the cameras that detailed their route between the consulate and the heart of old Istanbul.

One man is dressed in Khashoggi's clothes, but wearing different shoes.
The other man, his face obscured by a hoodie, is carrying a white plastic bag.

They head towards Istanbul's famous Blue Mosque.
When they re-emerge, the man previously dressed in Khashoggi's clothes has changed.

They hail a taxi back to their hotel, dumping the plastic bag - thought to contain Khashoggi's clothes - in a bin nearby, before going down into a subway and back to the Mövenpick Hotel.

"There was a very large degree of planning used to give the impression that nothing harmful had happened to Mr Khashoggi," says Callamard.

All this time, Cengiz was still waiting outside the consulate.

"I waited and waited and waited there past 15:30.
Then, when I realised the consulate had closed, I started running towards it.
I asked why Jamal didn't come out.
A guard told me he didn't know what I was talking about."

At 16:41, Cengiz was desperate and phoned an old friend of Khashoggi's.
He had given her the number in case he was ever in trouble.

Dr Yasin Aktay is a member of Turkey's ruling party with contacts at the highest levels.

"I received a call from an unknown number, a really worried voice from a lady I didn't know," he says.
"She said, 'My fiance Jamal Khashoggi went into the Saudi consulate and didn't come out.'"

Dr Yasin Aktay


Yasin swiftly called the head of Turkish intelligence and alerted the office of President Tayyip Erdogan.

By 18:30, the members of the hit squad were on a private jet to Riyadh, less than 24 hours after they had arrived.

The next day, the Saudi and Turkish governments issued contradictory statements about what had happened inside the consulate.
Saudi Arabia insisted Khashoggi had left the consulate.
The Turks said he was still inside.

Turkish intelligence was already poring over the consulate recordings - including the calls made four days before Khashoggi disappeared.

So did they know at that time that his life was in danger and, if so, why did they not warn him?

"I don't think they knew.
There is no evidence that they were listening live to what was happening," says Callamard.

"This kind of intelligence is done on a regular basis, and it's only because there is a trigger that they may return to the tapes.
It was only because Mr Khashoggi was killed and disappeared that they returned to the tape."

Ersöz tells me his former intelligence colleagues reviewed the tapes retrospectively and went through between 4,000 and 5,000 hours of material to find the key days and the 45 minutes presented to Callamard and Kennedy.

Four days after Khashoggi was killed, another Saudi team arrived - claiming they had come to find out what had happened.

Callamard believes they were really a clean-up team.
For two weeks, the Saudis would not allow Turkish investigators to enter the consulate.

"By the time they were able to collect some evidence, there was nothing there, not even DNA evidence of Mr Khashoggi having been there," says Callamard.

"The only logical conclusion is that the place was thoroughly, forensically cleaned."

Turkish police at the Saudi consulate


That evening, the Turkish authorities told the media that Khashoggi had been murdered in the Saudi consulate.

"Jamal really didn't deserve this, He deserved so much better," says Cengiz.
"The way they killed him, it killed all my hope in life."

The killing in Istanbul, inside an embassy with diplomatic immunity, put the Turkish authorities in a quandary.

For weeks, despite mounting pressure from the Turks, the Saudis refused to admit the murder, saying first there had been "a fist fight" in the consulate and then claiming it was "a rogue operation".

Protest outside the Saudi Embassy in the United States, six days after the disappearance of Jamal Khashoggi


The Turkish authorities' strategy was to leak some of what they knew to local and international press.
They then invited representatives from the CIA and a few handpicked intelligence agencies, including MI6, to listen to the tapes, proving Khashoggi was murdered by Saudi state operatives.

The CIA reportedly came to the conclusion there was "medium to high certainty" that Mohammad bin Salman had ordered the killing.
They briefed Congressmen who were left in no doubt about the finding.

In January, the Saudi government finally put 11 people on trial in Riyadh for the murder of Khashoggi, including Mutreb and Dr al-Tubaigy, but not the alleged mastermind - Saud al-Qahtani.

He has not been indicted or even summoned to court to give evidence.
I have been told he is being kept in seclusion away from everyone, including his own family, but is still in contact with the crown prince.

Callamard's report for the UN Human Rights Council has reached a decisive conclusion.

"There is no indication under international law that this crime could be qualified under any other way but as a state killing," she says.

Kennedy says the revelations of the Khashoggi murder tapes must be acted on.

"Something treacherous and terrible happened in that embassy.
The international community has a responsibility to insist on a high-level judicial enquiry," she says.

Turkey has demanded the extradition of those involved to face trial in Istanbul.
But Saudi Arabia has refused.

The Saudi government declined to give an interview to Panorama, but said it condemned the "abhorrent killing" and it was committed to holding the perpetrators accountable.

It said that the crown prince had "absolutely nothing to do" with what it called a "heinous crime".

Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman


One year on, as we leave the cafe, I can see the pain still suffered by the woman left behind when her fiance's life was cut short so brutally.

In her parting words to me, Hatice Cengiz warns of the true significance of the killing of Jamal Khashoggi.

"It's not only a tragedy for me - but for all humanity, all the people who think like Jamal and who took a stance like him."



####
document number 11: 
Casey Anthony Trial



In 2011, the notorious trial of Casey Anthony took place.
Below is our original day-by-day update of that trial.


On July 15, 2008, 2-year-old Caylee Anthony’s grandmother reported her missing.
After months of investigation focusing on Casey Anthony, Caylee’s mother, Caylee’s skeletal remains were found near her house.
Throughout that time Anthony lied repeatedly regarding her daughter’s whereabouts.

The legal proceedings against Casey Anthony for murder and misleading law enforcement finally began with jury selection.
Due to the massive publicity associated with the case, this process took place in Clearwater, Florida rather than in Orlando where the crime took place, in the hopes of finding a jury pool untainted by the media attention.
That pool of jurors began shrinking as the judge allowed many to go home for financial and family reasons–the jury could have been sequestered for months, preventing jurors from working or taking care of family.

Potential jurors’ answers to several questions would narrow the pool further–for instance, any preconceived ideas about the case based on the media attention may influence the decision, as may strongly held views on the death penalty.

At this step in a prolonged and controversial case, the selection of the jury is a historical moment, but is not the only aspect of the trial that made history in the field of criminal investigation.
The judge ruled that evidence regarding decomposition should be admissible–the first time evidence of this nature will ever appear before a Florida court.

During the investigation, multiple witnesses, including a police officer with experience with decomposed remains through the homicide department, noticed a "decompositional" odor in Casey Anthony’s car.
Tests were later done of the air in the trunk by experts from the University of Tennessee, the university that hosts the body farm, to show that a decomposing body had been in the car.
The judge’s ruling allowed these witnesses to testify to this information before the jury.

For a full timeline of the case, go here.
For the jury selection process, go here.

9-1-1 Calls ~ May 16, 2011 If you’re interested in the 9-1-1 calls from Caylee’s grandmother Cindy Anthony, you can find transcripts of them here.

Body Decomposition ~ May 16, 2011 For more information about the possibility body decomposition found in Casey Anthony’s vehicle click here.

Trial Expected to Start on Monday May 23, 2011 Said Judge ~ May 20, 2011 After days of jury selection in Clearwater, Florida, sixteen jurors remained out of the far larger jury pool.
Twelve are required for the trial, plus several alternates, and after a number of potential jurors were let go for reasons such as financial hardship or personal reasons the attorneys believed may bias their decisions, the number of alternates were lower than originally planned.
Nevertheless, Judge Perry planned to begin opening arguments the week of May 23rd in Orlando.
The trial was expected to last up to eight weeks, with the jury sequestered throughout that time.

Trial Underway ~ May 25, 2011 Casey Anthony’s trial began the week of May 23rd with opening statements from both prosecution and defense attorneys.
While the prosecution stated, as expected, that only Casey Anthony could have killed her daughter Caylee, the defense had another theory.
Anthony’s attorney told the jury that Caylee’s death was an accidental drowning, and that the month-long delay before her disappearance was reported resulted from Casey and her father George Anthony’s panic upon finding the body.
Casey’s behavior afterwards–lying to her friends and family about her daughter’s whereabouts, as well as partying at local clubs–resulted from a lifelong habit of hiding her pain, according to her lawyer.
They alleged that this habit was formed in her childhood because her father sexually abused her.
George Anthony testified as the first witness of the trial, denying both the abuse and his presence at Caylee’s death.

The Trial Continued ~ May 27, 2011 The fourth day of the long-awaited trial of Casey Anthony continued with the prosecution presenting their case against Anthony with several more witnesses.
In addition to continuing to emphasize Anthony’s failure to mention her daughter’s disappearance after it occurred, the testimony has begun outlining the story put forth by the prosecution.

Witnesses testified that Anthony did not act differently after Caylee’s disappearance, clubbing and claiming Caylee was with a nanny.
However, these witnesses also admitted under cross-examination that when she was seen with her daughter she did not appear to be a bad mother or to mistreat Caylee.

A major witness who testified on this day was Anthony’s father, George.
He described the disappearance of some gas cans from his shed, which he later confronted his daughter about.
She retrieved them from the trunk of her car and returned them.
This occurred about a week after Caylee was last seen, but allegedly before anyone in the family knew she was missing.
Anthony’s former boyfriend Lazzaro also testified about the gas cans, saying he helped her break into the shed to take them.

Before the gas cans were taken, George Anthony had left duct tape on one of them, and according to him, the returned cans had no duct tape.
This is a relatively rare type of tape that was apparently found on Caylee’s remains six months later, according to the prosecution.

The Scent of Decomposition and Motive for Murder ~ May 28, 2011 The prosecution continued to present testimony against Casey Anthony.
They focused on Anthony’s car, as the jury heard George Anthony describe the smell of decomposition in the car as he drove it home from impound.
It had been found abandoned in a parking lot and towed two weeks earlier.
The towing company’s manager also testified to the smell, saying it was detectible even with the car closed but far stronger when the doors and trunk were opened.
The decomposition of a human body is a very unique and recognizable smell to anyone with experience with it, and the manager testified that he has had that experience.
George Anthony also claims familiarity with the stench through his time as a detective.

The prosecution began addressing Anthony’s motive by attempting to present text messages they say show Anthony’s true feelings about her daughter–that Caylee stood in the way of her desire for a party-filled lifestyle and her relationship with her boyfriend Lazarro.
Judge Belvin Perry questioned the probative nature of these messages, and suggested they would be excessively prejudicial, so the prosecution withdrew their attempted introduction of them.

For the full story of this testimony, go here.

Caylee’s Grandmother Testifies ~ May 30, 2011 Saturday May 28th’s session of the Casey Anthony trial was short, focusing on the testimony of Cindy Anthony, Casey’s mother.
It was Cindy who finally reported Caylee missing a month after she last saw her, and her testimony focused on that month.
Cindy described her repeated attempts to see her granddaughter, and her daughter’s varied explanations for the child’s absence.
The explanations involved a nanny named Zanny who was taking care of Caylee while Anthony attended work meetings, as well as a car accident during an outing in Tampa.
Another explanation was that they were staying in a hotel with a wealthy suitor.
These stories conflict with previous testimony, and Anthony’s lawyers have suggested Anthony’s lies during this period were due to a habit of hiding her pain based on a history of abuse.

Casey’s Claims Disputed ~ June 2, 2011 Testimony in the Casey Anthony trial brought out evidence of Anthony’s deception regarding her job and her boyfriend.
Having heard testimony that Anthony told friends and family that she had a wealthy suitor named Jeffrey Michael Hopkins, and that she had a job at Universal Studios; on this day, the jury heard from an acquaintance of Anthony’s named Jeff Hopkins and from an employee at Universal.
Hopkins said he knew Anthony from school, but had no children and had not introduced Anthony to a nanny for Caylee, as she had claimed.
Several other aspects and details of her stories about him were also untrue, including their relationship, his job, and where he lived.
Leonard Turtora, the Universal Studios employee questioned by police about Anthony’s job, also testified, explaining that she had not worked at Universal during the time she claimed.

Testimony included a description of a statement and interview given by Anthony after Caylee was reported missing, in which she claimed Caylee had been kidnapped by the nanny introduced to her by Hopkins.
Investigators were unable to find the nanny described by Anthony.
Anthony claimed she did not come to the police after the kidnapping out of fear.
The defense’s claim that Caylee died in an accidental drowning clearly conflicts with this original statement.

Hair-Like Caylee’s Found in Car ~ June 4, 2011 After multiple witnesses testified to smelling a decompositional odor coming from Casey Anthony’s car, evidence was presented suggesting it was Caylee’s body creating the smell.
A hair found in the car resembles one taken from Caylee’s brush, according to a trace analyst from the FBI.
She also said the hair from the trunk of the car contained a mark she had only seen in hairs from decomposing bodies–that is, hairs still in the scalp when the body started decomposing.
The resemblence to Caylee’s hair was not an absolute identification, since hair comparisons are never absolute to the individual, and consists primarily of color similarities.
The DNA present in the hair shaft was also tested, but this was not DNA that can be linked to a single individual either.

While hair ripped by the root can still contain nuclear DNA, the shaft of hair such as that found in the car contains only mitochondrial DNA.
Unlike nuclear DNA, mitochondrial DNA does not change between generations, but is passed directly and intact from the mother to the child.
This means the DNA analysis of the hair shows only that it belonged to someone in Caylee’s maternal line, such as Caylee, Casey, or Cindy Anthony.

The analyst described a particular band on the hair as consistent with decomposition, but this observation is based only on her experience, and is not a proven correlation.

Other interesting forensic evidence brought up included air samples taken from the car, which showed signs of gases consistent with decomposition, as well as chloroform, which is what the prosecution says Anthony used to kill her daughter.

Decomposition Evidence ~ June 7, 2011 Testimony focused thus far on forensic evidence of decomposition in Casey Anthony’s car, where the prosecution alleged she kept her daughter’s decomposing body in the trunk.
After hearing from multiple witnesses describing an odor of decomposition in the car, the jury heard evidence from experts regarding the same odor.

Several aspects of the trunk’s smell were presented.
A trash bag was found in the trunk and ruled out by technicians as being the source of the odor recognized by witnesses; a highly trained cadaver dog alerted on the trunk, indicating that a body had been stored within; and the jury heard from Arpad Vass, a forensic anthropologist conducting research at the body farm on decomposition.

Vass performed chemical tests on air samples from the trunk, carpet samples, the spare tire cover, and scrapings from the wheel well of the car.
Of the 30 or so chemicals he has found in his research to be significant to human decomposition, the samples from Anthony’s trunk contained seven, although only five were counted as two were trace amounts.
He testified that these results indicate only decomposing remains could account for the odor in the trunk.
He also testified that there were high levels of chloroform present in the samples–an important fact to the prosecution, which claims Anthony used chloroform on her daughter before smothering her.

Caylee’s Skeleton and Duct Tape Discussed at Length ~ June 10, 2011 While earlier testimony focused on the signs of decomposition from a body in Casey Anthony’s car, later testimony focused on the remains themselves.
Caylee Anthony’s skeleton was found on December 11, 2008, having decomposed in a field among garbage bags for up to six months.
Duct tape was found over the mouth, holding the jaw bone to the rest of the skull.
The placement of the duct tape was key in the prosecution’s case for foul play.

Chief medical examiner Dr. Jan Garvaglia testified today that the way the body was left "to rot" indicated foul play, along with the duct tape and Anthony’s failure to report her daughter’s disappearance.

Further evidence would include a superimposition of Caylee’s skull over her face, to show the placement of the duct tape as it would have been before decomposition.
While potentially disturbing, and therefore prejudicial to a jury, Judge Perry allowed this evidence because of its importance in the case.

Day 16 Brings out the Bugs ~ June 12, 2011 The Casey Anthony jurors saw testimony from a forensic entomologist, Neal Haskell, regarding insect evidence.
He explained that the insect species present at the body site indicated the body’s long-term presence, that it had been there since June or July before being discovered in December 2008.
He also explained that insects collected from the trunk of Anthony’s car indicated the presence of a body for a short time before being removed–an implication previous witnesses had suggested throughout the week.
Entomological evidence is the most accurate indication of time of death once the body has decomposed.

The video showing a superimposition of Caylee’s skull with duct tape over the mouth over a picture of her alive and smiling was shown the day before, adding to the decomposition testimony to make week three of the trial a very gruesome one.

Prosecution Planning to Rest ~ June 15, 2011 The prosecution in the Casey Anthony trial announced that they plan to finish presenting their case.
The day before this announcement, testimony included Cindy Anthony, Caylee’s grandmother, discussing items such as a Winnie the Pooh blanket and pieces of a canvas laundry bag found at the scene where Caylee’s remains were found.
The day finished with testimony from Casey Anthony’s tattoo artist describing a tattoo Anthony got saying "

bella vita

"–Italian for "beautiful life."

Motion for Acquittal Denied ~ June 16, 2011 After the prosecution finished presenting their case, the defense moved to acquit Casey Anthony on the grounds that the prosecution had not met the burden of proof–they claimed there was no evidence that Caylee Anthony was murdered or that there was premeditation.
Judge Perry denied the motion and the defense would begin presenting their case that today.

Defense Begins with DNA Evidence ~ June 16, 2011 Forensic scientists, who worked the Caylee Anthony case were questioned before the jury by the defense.
A crime scene investigator explained that he had found no stains on Casey Anthony’s clothes when he used an alternate light source to check for bodily fluids.
A forensic DNA examiner then testified that no blood was found in Anthony’s trunk; this is to be expected in a situation where no blood was shed, such as smothering, the cause of death proposed by the prosecution.
Blood might have been found from the decomposition of the remains in the trunk among the fluids released, if there was a hole in the bags the prosecution claimed the remains were wrapped in.
The examiner also described the lack of conclusive DNA evidence on the duct tape found on the remains.

Defense Brings out Prominent Experts to Attack Forensics ~ June 20, 2011 After testimony from the defense’s forensic entomologist disputing the previous claims of the prosecution’s entomologist, Casey Anthony’s defense brought out two prominent forensic experts.
First, forensic anthropologist William Rodriguez came forward to testify about the duct tape found near Caylee Anthony’s remains, but this opinion had not been shared with the court ahead of time.
The omission by the defense was in violation of a court order, and led to Judge Perry threatening defense attorney Baez with contempt for "game-playing."
Rodriguez is the co-founder of the body farm, so his testimony carries quite a bit of weight in court proceedings.

The trial continued with testimony from forensic pathologist Werner Spitz, author of what many consider to be the authoritative text on medicolegal death investigation.
He criticized the performance of the medical examiner in her investigation of Caylee Anthony’s death, particularly her autopsy, saying she should have opened the skull.
He also rejected the prosecution’s claim that the duct tape was used to kill Caylee, saying that rather than placed on her nose and mouth at the time of her death, it was most likely added after decomposition.
One reason to place duct tape on the skull at that point might be to hold the jawbone on while the body is moved.

Forensic Botanist Testifies ~ June 21, 2011 The Casey Anthony trial continued its pattern of presenting evidence from fairly obscure fields within the forensic sciences when a forensic botanist testified.
She discussed the plant evidence present at the site where Caylee’s remains were found, saying the roots growing in the hair mass could be as young as a few weeks old.
That plant evidence, therefore, does not suggest the body was there for six months, as the prosecution alleges–however, it also does not exclude the possibility.
She also explained that the plant evidence found in Anthony’s car did not appear to have come from the scene where the remains were found.

After this, a session was cancelled by Judge Perry after arguments between attorneys and a scramble on the part of the defense to produce a witness after their first two were rejected.
The next session was expected to be short.

Chloroform in Anthony’s Car; Cindy Made Online Chloroform Searches ~ June 24, 2011 A possible new lead for the prosecution turned up, in the form of a woman who shared jail time with Casey Anthony.
April Whalen had a toddler close in age to Caylee, who died in a drowning accident conspicuously similar to the one Anthony’s defense has put forward as Caylee’s cause of death—including the child being discovered by the grandfather.
The prosecution explored if Whalen was a possible inspiration for Anthony’s story.

In addition to this possible blow to the defense’s case, one of the defense’s witnesses appeared to have backfired.
The defense called a researcher who works with Vass, the forensic anthropologist who testified for the state regarding the decomposition chemicals he found in Anthony’s car.
This witness explained the chloroform they found in the trunk was surprising in a location like that, and that he and Vass were unable to find an explanation for its presence in the test.
Since the presence of chloroform could only support the prosecution’s case, this testimony was a blow to the defense.

As the trial continued quite a bit forensically was introduced.
A chemist testified that the air samples from the car contained mostly gasoline, and that the other chemicals were not positively associated with decomposition because other natural sources exist.
A forensic geologist discussed soil samples from shoes taken from the Anthony home, saying no evidence was present linking any of the shoes to the site where the remains were found—however, such soil evidence can easily fall off, so this lack means little.
A toxicologist explained that the hair mass found with the remains did not show evidence of drugs, but that it was not tested for chloroform.
Still more witnesses testified about chloroform and hair samples.
For more information on the forensics from the trial go here.

The testimony, however, that was most in the defense’s favor: Cindy Anthony came forward saying she made the computer searches for "chloroform" that had previously been attributed to her daughter.
She claimed she’d been looking up "chlorophyll" out of concern for the health of a pet that was eating plants in the backyard, and that she searched for information about chloroform because of its connection to chlorophyll.
There was some discussion of her records from work, however, which showed she was working at the time the searches were made, so it was up to the jury whether they found her testimony convincing.

Sudden Competency Question ~ June 27, 2011 In late June, Judge Perry called a sudden recess in the Casey Anthony trial before the jury even entered the courtroom, and cancelled any testimony that would have otherwise been presented.
At the time he gave no explanation beyond a "legal matter" arising.
A possible reason for the recess was revealed: Anthony’s defense claimed Anthony wasn’t competent to stand trial.
The motion was filed, and Perry immediately had Anthony examined by three psychologists.
He announced that, having reviewed the reports of the experts, Anthony was competent and the trial would continue.

Trial Winding Down ~ July 1, 2011 The defense spent their last few days on testimony from various players in the case including the meter reader who found Caylee Anthony’s remains in December 2008.
The defense claimed he found the body far earlier and moved it to its final location to get a reward, a claim which he denied on the stand.

The theory of the case put forth by the defense involved Casey Anthony being molested by her father, a history that led her to lie about her emotions and hide her daughter’s death for the month before her absence was reported.
They had a difficult time proving this history, however, as the only witness who connected Anthony to any molestation was her ex-fiancee, and his testimony was not allowed by Judge Perry.
Even that witness would only have testified to Anthony claiming she was "groped" by her brother, and the defense never questioned her brother on the stand regarding that claim.

The defense also questioned George Anthony, Casey’s father, bringing up a suicide attempt he made after Caylee was found.
This opened the door for the prosecution to bring in his suicide note as evidence during rebuttal, and that is exactly what they did.
His reasons for attempting suicide did not include his granddaughter’s accidental drowning as alleged by the defense.

On June 30th, the defense in the Casey Anthony trial rested its case, and July 1st the prosecution began its rebuttal, expecting to finish by the end of the day.
Perry declared there would be no court on July 2nd, and closing statements would be made on Sunday July 3rd, allowing the jury to begin deliberation by the holiday.

Closing Statements ~ July 3, 2011 On July 3rd, the state and defense in the Casey Anthony trial gave closing statements, bringing together their arguments before the jury began deliberations.

The state focused on Anthony’s many lies throughout the period her daughter was missing, then discussed the items found with the body, claiming they showed that a stranger could not have killed Caylee.
They argued that the defense theory of the case–that Caylee died in an accidental drowning covered up by her grandfather–was illogical.

The defense emphasized holes in the prosecution’s case, claiming they did not explain how Caylee died and were trying to play up the lying and partying on Anthony’s part to play on the jury’s emotions and turn them against her.
They dismissed the explanation of Anthony’s motives alleged by the prosecution–that she felt her daughter was in the way of the lifestyle she wanted.

Once the statements were completed the jury began deliberations.

Deliberations ~ July 5, 2011 On the morning of July 4th, the jury in the Casey Anthony trial began deliberating.
On July 5th, they pick up where they left off after six hours the day before.

Casey Anthony Found Not Guilty ~ July 5, 2011 After ten hours of deliberations, the jury in Casey Anthony’s trial came back with a verdict: not guilty on all major charges.
They found her guilty of the four counts of giving False Information to Law Enforcement with which she was charged, but not guilty of the murder and child abuse counts.

Less Than a Week Left in Casey Anthony’s Sentence ~ July 7, 2011 After her conviction of four counts of lying to law enforcement, Casey Anthony was sentenced by Judge Perry to one year per count–four years in all.
Since she has spent approximately three years in jail already, and has had good behavior, Anthony will complete her sentence in a week on July 13.
Perry also fined Anthony $1,000 for each of the four counts.

DCF Concludes Casey Anthony is Responsible for Caylee’s Death ~ August 12, 2011 While Casey Anthony was acquitted of criminal charges of murder and aggravated child abuse by the jury in her trial, Florida’s Department of Children and Families came to another conclusion.
They released a report saying Anthony was responsible for her daughter’s death.
While not claiming she physically harmed Caylee, the report concluded that her failure to act for a month after the child went missing was not in her best interest–if nothing else, it delayed investigation that could have led to Caylee’s recovery.
The report is simply the conclusion of the department’s investigation and will not lead to any further charges against Anthony.
For more on the story, go here.

Casey Anthony’s Probation ~ August 15, 2011 Judge Perry from Casey Anthony’s murder trial made one more ruling regarding Anthony–she is to report for supervised probation in Orlando.
This probation is for her check fraud conviction, unrelated to the murder trial that made her famous.
Among other things, her probation forbids her to consume drugs or alcohol, associate with known criminals, or own a firearm, and she must report regularly to a probation officer.
The only difference in her probation from the standard for this type of crime is that Perry’s withholding her address for her protection.
Since her acquittal in July, Anthony was being called America’s most-hated person, and throughout her probation the Department of Corrections will do their best to keep her safe from an angry public.

Casey Anthony Fights Reimbursement Motion ~ September 2, 2011 It’s unlikely to surprise anyone that the dramatic, very public and drawn-out trial of Casey Anthony cost Florida a great deal of money–as did the investigation into Caylee’s disappearance.
While Anthony was acquitted of the murder charges, the jury did convict her of lying to authorities about her daughter’s disappearance, which arguably increased the cost of the search (especially since she admitted later to knowing Caylee was dead the whole time).
Based on this, prosecutors are moving to have Anthony cover these costs–which total over $500,000.
Her lawyers are fighting the motion in court.

Casey Anthony Ordered to Repay Nearly $100,000 in Investigative Costs ~ September 18, 2011 This may seem like a small price to pay considering the total cost of the investigation.
However, the defense attorneys argued this was an unfair amount to expect her to pay especially since she was only charged with four counts of lying to the police.
The prosecutors argue that since the lying was "intertwined" with the rest of the investigation, Anthony should be forced to repay these charges.

Judge Belvin Perry stated that under Florida law Anthony can only be charged for costs that were "reasonably necessary" to prove the charges for which she was convicted.
This limitation restricts her from being billed for any murder investigation or prosecution costs.
A hearing determined that Anthony cannot be charged with any costs after September 29, 2008 since that marked the end of the missing person phase of the investigation.

Judge Perry gave Anthony orders to pay the total of $97,676.98, which includes:


$61,505.12 to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement


10,283.90 to the Metropolitan Bureau of Investigation


$25,837.96 to the Orange County Sheriff’s Office


$50.00 to the Office of the State Attorney



Some of the expenses of the sheriff’s department couldn’t be broken down to determine what work was performed prior to September 30, 2008.
The judge gave investigators until September 18, 2011, to submit revised reports and the total costs could then be raised accordingly.

Anthony’s Bill More Than Doubles ~ September 24, 2011 Casey Anthony now officially owes $217,449.23, over twice the amount decided on during the previous ruling but still less than half of what the state requested.
The increase followed a new set of expense reports regarding the costs of the investigation, providing an additional $119,822.25 for the sheriff’s office costs.

Casey Anthony Still Unemployed ~ October 5, 2011 On Monday, October 3, Casey Anthony reported to her monthly meeting with her probation officer in Florida.
According to the Florida DOC report, she had no violations this month to the terms of her probation.
She reported she still has no job or source of income.
The DOC report can be found here.
Some of the terms of her probation include finding a job, not doing illegal drugs, and reporting to a probation officer monthly.

Casey Anthony Pleads the Fifth ~ December 8, 2011 One of the lies Casey Anthony told early on in the investigation of her daughter’s disappearance, a lie she was convicted of telling in her criminal trial, involved a nanny name Zenaida Fernandez-Gonzalez.
While the nanny was revealed to be fictitious, a woman named Zenaida Gonzalez has since claimed that Anthony’s story has led to extreme difficulties in her life, including loss of a job and apartment.
As a result, she’s suing Anthony for defamation.
Anthony was deposed for the civil suit in October, and used the fifth amendment (the right against self-incrimination) 60 times to avoid answering questions.
On December 8th, 2011, a hearing took place to decide whether she will be forced to answer these questions.
The judge has reserved ruling on the issue.
For updates on this go here.

Recent Updates A Florida’s Fifth District Court of Appeals threw out two of the four charges against infamous mother, Casey Anthony, for lying to police in regards to the disappearance and death of her two-year-old daughter, Caylee Anthony, in 2008.
Though tried and acquitted in 2011 for the first degree murder of her daughter, the courts found her guilty of four counts of, "Providing false information to a law enforcement officer during a missing person investigation," and sentenced to four years including time served, as she had already spent three years awaiting trial.

However, the courts struck two of these charges, arguing that they constituted double jeopardy.
Double jeopardy insinuates being convicted twice for a single crime, and is not permitted under the law.
Additionally, lawyers for Anthony argued that the four lies should be counted as a single offense.
This was not accepted by the court, as there was a sufficient break in time between the two lies making them separate criminal acts.
Anthony has the right to appeal the remaining two convictions.

Additionally, states have begun passing "Caylee’s Law".
For more information go here.



####
document number 12: 
Diamond Princess ship to remain in quarantine for a week


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


The largest outbreak outside mainland China is on a cruise ship.
The Diamond Princess off the coast of Japan has now 175 positive cases, 15 of them are Australians.



####
document number 13: 
My Vehicle Adaptation


What type of vehicle do you drive and how is it adapted for you?

"I have a BraunAbility Entervan with a mechanical steering system and a number of different adaptations such as lightened power steering, a seat belt adaptation, moved electrical functions, a more bucketed seat and a wheelchair lock etcetera.
Perhaps the most eye catching adaptation is the steering wheel and pedals.
Since I don’t have any arms or legs we’ve moved all the controls closer to me.
Apart from the steering the one thing that really makes me an independent driver is the lowered floor.
It gives me the freedom to enter and exit my car as I want."


How did you come up with this solution?

"Growing up I spent a lot of time with my father in his car, I observed and thought about what I would need to be able to drive.
When I later decided to get a driver’s licence I had already drawn up the necessary adaptations in my head.
The adaptations I have today are pretty much the same as I got back in 1983.
The real change is that everything is better and safer.
Back then an adaptation could be a bent metal bar fixed dangerously close to my body in order to move some mechanical function.
Today you wouldn’t even consider that sort of thing."


Is this your first adapted vehicle?

"No, this will be my fourth."


What will be the main difference for you with this new adaptation?

"When it comes down to the actual functions there aren’t really any drastic changes.
The main difference is as I’ve said, in safety and ergonomics.
For instance we’ve improved the way the steering wheel collapses in the case of a crash, also the lock that keeps my powered wheelchair secured has been improved a lot.

I came really close to choosing an electronic steering system but in the end I went with the mechanical solution.
I don’t really have anything bad to say about electronic steering systems but I personally feel that I don’t have the same connection to the road as I do with a mechanical system.
At the same time I know having the steering wheel close to my body isn’t really optimal either but in the end it all comes down to making choices.
I spend a lot of time on the road and whether I’m driving my kids to school; overtaking a truck on the highway or driving on icy roads I feel more comfortable doing it mechanically rather than trusting it to electronics.

Oh!
I have an automatic hatch opener, I’ve never had that before and I really look forward to put things in the trunk by myself."


If you could choose freely where in the world would you take your adapted vehicle?

"Australia!
I’d really love to go there.
Partly because I would like to experience driving on the left side of the road but also because of the varying scenery in Australia."



####
document number 14: 
Let me tell you about my experience as a convert to Judaism


I was a raised as a Christian, Pentecostal Holiness to be exact.
It was a long journey from there to the Assemblies of God, to a Messianic congregation, to a Conservative conversion and finally to an Orthodox conversion in the land of Israel 13 years ago.

In 2001, my wife, my son and I got off a plane, kissed the ground and were loaded into a truck full of watermelons that dropped us off at an absorption center in Ra’anana.
Those were the good ole days of aliyah, before Nefesh B’nefesh took all the shock and awe out of the experience.

A few days later, a local Rav invited us for Shabbat.
We told our story and started learning for conversion the very next week.
I had a structured learning program with this Rav in the kollel and private learning in a program with a Rav from Bnei Brak.

My wife did all of her learning with a female teacher from Bnei Brak.
I hear the newfangled term for this is Yoetzet.
I don’t think she used that term, but she taught my wife the laws of kashruth, family purity and Shabbath.
She was present in meetings with the Beth Din and she was there for my wife until the day we stepped out of the mikveh as newborn Jews.

The entire process took a total of four months and other than some minimal registration fees, we were never charged money for our conversion.
The community in Ra’anana and friends in our new community of Ma’aleh Adumim made us a beautiful Chuppah.
The Chief Rabbi of Ma’ale Adumim personally paid the fees for registering our marriage and helped me get my first job in Israel.
When we rented our first apartment, the owner of the real estate agency instructed our agent to return the realty fee when she heard we were both new olim and converts.
We were warmly welcomed to the point that we didn’t eat a Shabbat meal in our own home for at least a year.

Ra’anana was great.
Ma’ale Adumim was and still is great.
We never felt abused, slighted or unwelcomed.

I don’t doubt that the conversion horror stories I’ve heard are true and I’m not making light of the allegations and complaints that have been published recently.
I personally know people who have had their families destroyed, been abused emotionally, financially and even sexually within the conversion system in the US.

I’m simply saying that what I’ve been hearing from the US is nothing like the experience I had.
I don’t know if I was blessed or just lucky, but I had a very holy and life-changing conversion experience, and today I’m a…(I was going to say "normal", but anyone who knows me would laugh if they saw that)… I’m a very happy and content Jew, living where I should live, loving and being loved by my family, friends and neighbors.

If you are considering conversion to Judaism, don’t let headlines and op-eds scare you away from the direction your soul is being pulled.
Judaism and Jews don’t always get it right.
All that man touches, he corrupts.
Rabbis come and go, conversion courts come and go, and all will one day give an accounting for what they have done.
But all conversion stories aren’t bad and the truth will always be true.
If you want the truth, you will find it in the Torah of Moses, a tree of life for those who take hold of it.

The people of Israel will be your people, the God of Israel will be your God.
May He guide you and watch over you on your journey.

About the Author

I'm just a simple person that loves learning as much as I can about as many things as possible.
I live in Maaleh Adumim and work in Jerusalem.



####
document number 15: 
US targets, kills Iranian military leaders in rocket strike at Baghdad airport






####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = cyber bullying
document number 1: 
Cyber Bullying – My Story


Many things in this world you just can’t explain.
You can’t explain why sometimes when sitting down you tend to shake your leg.
You can’t explain why sometimes you have a tendency to bite your nails.
Sometimes you can’t explain why some people in this world have so much time on their hands, to want to try to sabotage your life through cyber bullying.

According to Statistics Canada, in 2012 aside from cyber property violations, cyber threats and sex crimes were next in line (Waugh, 2014).

"The results, which span a population of 27.5 million people for the year 2012 (the latest year for which data is available), show that cybercrime is far from being anonymous and victimless.
Cybercrime affects large numbers of people in a serious way (a total of 9,084 crimes were serious enough to be reported to police, or 33 cybercrimes per 100,000 population) (Waugh, 2014).

aperture":"0","credit":"","camera":"","caption":"","created_timestamp":"0","copyright":"","focal_length":"0","iso":"0","shutter_speed":"0","title":"","orientation":"0"}" data-image-title="" data-large-file="https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png?w=604" data-medium-file="https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png?w=300" data-orig-file="https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png" data-orig-size="604,525" data-permalink="https://vancouverprgirl.com/2015/05/06/cyber-bullying-my-story/attachment/1/#main" sizes="(max-width: 520px) 100vw, 520px" src="https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png" srcset="https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png?w=520=452 520w, https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png?w=150=130 150w, https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png?w=300=261 300w, https://ndrealynn.files.wordpress.com/2015/05/1.png 604w">



####
document number 2: 
'I was cyberbullied after Trump attacked me on Twitter'


https://ift.tt/30DJNG9

When President Trump targeted 18-year-old Lauren Batchelder on Twitter after she questioned him about women's rights at an event, her life became a living nightmare.
This is her story

BBC / Wonderhood Studios / Emeka Photographer: Emeka Onono Image Copyright: Wonderhood Studios Programme Maker: Wonderhood Studios


Lauren Batchelder was 18 and just a couple of months into university when she decided to attend a political campaign event in her home state of New Hampshire in October 2015, where Presidential candidates were speaking ahead of the 2016 US election.
During the event, Lauren, now 23, asked future President Donald Trump a question about women’s rights – and then her life changed forever.

Trump targeted the young American on Twitter and for weeks and months after Lauren endured merciless trolling, death threats, rape threats, and even received excrement through her letterbox.

Five years later, Lauren has decided to speak about her ordeal in BBC documentary

Trump in Tweets.

Here, she opens up to

Marie Claire

about the toll cyberbullying had on her life, what Trump is like in person and what social media companies need to do to tackle this ongoing problem.

How were you able to get picked for a question?

Everyone was raising their hand to be picked and I was like ‘Mr. Trump!
Mr.
Trump!’
I didn’t think he would turn around, but he did and he picked me.

What did you want to ask?

I was worried about his views on women – in particular our rights and not supporting abortion.
I saw him as someone who didn’t necessarily respect women and the summer before I was sexually assaulted.
I felt a lot of anger and emotion I kind of used him as a stand-in for my rapist.

Can you describe what it was like being in his presence…

He just loved the spotlight.
He was totally enjoying all the attention.
He had this great stage presence compared to the other candidates, where he just felt so comfortable.
It was really fascinating to watch.

What happened after you asked the question?

He said, ‘I really shouldn’t have picked you’, before going on to say he ‘respects women incredibly’.
When I left the event with a few friends from college [university], news media were already reporting ‘girl taunts Trump’.
I never had any expectation about what was going to happen the next day.

Presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks at a rally in New Hampshire in 2015 (Getty Images)


The future President of the United States tweets you…

He wrote, ‘The arrogant young woman who questioned me in such a nasty fashion was a Jeb staffer!
HOW CAN HE BEAT RUSSIA CHINA?’
What he meant by that was I had spent time working for Jeb Bush, one of Trump’s political rivals, because I was incredibly passionate about politics.
But I think it’s very obvious that I wasn’t a plant because Jeb Bush is catholic, and he is against abortion.
Why would the campaign send someone in to ask a question about a woman’s right to choose?
It just doesn’t make sense.

In the days, weeks and months that followed, you endured intense cyber bullying.
What did some of the tweets say?

‘You’re so ugly, ‘you are too fat’, ‘you’re never going to get married’.
At one point my name was even trending on Twitter.
Then the comments, messages and letters started to take a more sexual tone – a man called my phone and asked me to give him a blowjob since I was ‘such a slut’.
Another time someone sent me an audio link where men were saying they wanted to masturbate all over my photos.
One person pooped in a box and mailed it to me from California.
It truly felt like an out of body experience.
And it just got worse and worse and worse.

Who was doing this?

Mainly adults, there were also a lot of fake accounts, so it’s hard to know for certain.

Did you ever reply to comments?

No, but I also didn’t shut anything down and I should have.
There were thousands and thousands of awful things being thrown around and I couldn’t stop looking.

How did the cyber bullying affect you?

For the longest time I couldn’t take a photo of myself or be in any.
I felt so much loathing and self-hatred.
I didn’t want to look in the mirror.
For a couple of years after, I hated myself, because I’d been called ‘fat’ and ‘ugly’ so many times.
The whole experience was really detrimental to my mental health.

Was there a particular time when you really weren’t in a good place?

Yes, I almost dropped out of school.
There were a couple times when I definitely wanted to die.
I just wanted to be a completely different person.
I would just sit in my bed all day.
There was anxiety, depression.
It was a dark time.

What was your family’s reaction to this ordeal?

My parents and younger sister were shocked, and they couldn’t just say to me, ‘Don’t worry, don’t think about it,’ because it was on the internet.
It was always there to be seen and accessed.
I had friends who carried me through but equally a lot of my friendships were damaged by this.

Are you a Democrat or Republican?

I was raised in a really conservative household, so I started off as a conservative.
When I got to college [university] I realised it just was not who I was at all.
I’ve definitely become a Democrat when it comes to the party’s beliefs and standards it upholds.

How did you eventually get to a place where it wasn’t affecting your life?

Lots of therapy.
Talking with professional people.
I was finally able to close that chapter and take a photo again.

Lauren pictured in 2015, before she attended the political event where Trump was speaking (Supplied by Lauren Batchelder)


Do you feel these huge social media platforms should intervene more when someone is communicating a potentially dangerous tweet, or do you see the other side, that freedom of speech is important to protect?

In America we like to think that freedom of speech is freedom of consequences, and that’s really not how it works.
I do think that social media companies need to get involved.
Especially when they’re catering to teenagers.

I remember there was this one account – and it’s still out there – filled with a group of people who talked about how much they hated me.
I kept getting notifications and I kept reporting it on Facebook, but I was told it didn’t violate any of Facebook’s policies.

I feel companies should focus on prevention, not aftermath.
It’s too late if a teenager has killed themselves because of cyberbullying, you’ll never get them back.

What could the companies do?

Plenty.
Firstly, they could be watching for more trigger words.
If someone tells someone ‘I want you to die’, the comment should immediately be taken down.
And they should be more responsive when people are reporting these messages that are potentially harmful to them.

Finally, they should implement prevention programmes.
People who are cyberbullied are scientifically 1.9 times more likely to die by suicide, but that’s also similar for the cyber bullies.
They are 1.6 times more likely to kill themselves, because many of them have been traumatised or experienced suffering themselves.
We’re not going to be able to stop cyberbullying without helping people’s mental health.
And these companies have the money and the resources.
So why not help?

Has this experience changed your relationship with social media?

I still like using Twitter.
I try and use my voice for good.

What’s your advice to teenagers being cyberbullied today?

Firstly, please understand it does get better.
At the time it feels like it’s never going to end, but it does.
The hurt does go away.
The second thing that’s really important is to talk to people – friends, family, a therapist.
Then you are more likely to not have a breakdown.

Should you stand up for yourself if you’re being cyberbullied?
Or does it make matters worse?

I think generally speaking the best thing to do is to just leave it.
However it can be incredibly empowering to stand up for yourself.
If this happened again, now I am older, I would definitely say something.
I’m an older, stronger person now.

Do you still attend therapy now?

I haven’t in a while, but it’s on speed dial should I want to talk.

Did this experience shape what career you wanted as an adult?

Yes.
I’m still really interested in politics and I’m currently in the process of getting ready to start applying to law school.
I want to be a Human Rights lawyer and help as many people as possible.

What is your take on Trump’s leadership over the years?

I’m trying to find the positives.
But I do recognise that other presidents before Trump haven’t fixed our issues like free healthcare and American children living in poverty.
However, in my opinion, Trump has exacerbated everything.
He’s fuelling racism and only cares about himself.
If this wasn’t true, our coronavirus cases would be a lot lower.

What is the mood like in America, following the Black Lives Matter protests?

Racism is part of America’s history and it permeates every part of our society today.
What is different now is people are listening and saying, ‘Okay, what can I do?’
Hopefully it lasts.

What’s the biggest change you would like to see for women in America?

I’m passionate about making sure that every woman has the right to choose what she can do with her body.

Trump is up against Joe Biden.
Both are older, white men.
Would you like to see more diversity in powerful positions?

I would love to see a female president.
And I would especially love to see more people of colour in power.
We’ve had enough of the old white man.
We’re just we’re not getting there.
Let’s experiment a bit.
Let’s change it up.

Do you believe Trump can change?

He has a choice to be a completely different person.
Do I think that’s going to happen?
No, but I believe that anyone can become a better person.

Did you ever hear from Trump again?

No.
Radio silence.

BBC Three’s Trump in Tweets is available on BBC iPlayer


The post 'I was cyberbullied after Trump attacked me on Twitter' appeared first on Marie Claire.

from Marie Claire https://ift.tt/3eOSNgE via IFTTT



####
document number 3: 
How To Catch A Cyber Bully And Shut Them Down: My Story


Editor’s Note: With #NoPlace4Hate, Youth Ki Awaaz and Facebook have joined hands to help make the Internet a safer space for all.
Watch this space for powerful stories of how young people are mobilising support and speaking out against online bullying.

I am a 21-year-old from Bangalore, who just got out of college and is about to start her corporate career.
My motive behind writing this article is that I believe I need to speak up on an issue thousands of people face and keep mum about.
I want to share my experience because it is important and may help many, or at least make them aware.
I encourage you to keep an open mind as I begin.

In June 2016, I started seeing someone.
It was a long-distance relationship as he was residing in America.
As we couldn’t meet our conversations were over text daily.
After a while, I cut him off for personal reasons and started to move on with my life.
He also started seeing someone in November last year.

However, recently I started receiving messages from a fake account on Instagram.
The messages were abusive, claimed they had my nudes and the intent was clearly to hurt me and to get me upset.
I first decided to ignore them as it was a fake account and this person was just fooling around.
But things got a little out of hand when this fake account messaged my friend on Instagram sending her messages about me to spoil my reputation.
That was the first time I realized it wasn’t someone who was fooling around, but definitely someone who knew enough about me and wanted to hurt me.



So being the anxious and worried woman that I am (because who isn’t worried about their privacy and modesty) I decided to snoop around a little and try and find out who this person is.
Like any normal person, I looked online for ways to hack into Instagram accounts so that I could shut it down or find out who was behind this.
And I found sites that claimed they could hack into the account.
As is usual, they didn’t work.

So, I gave up and decided to let it go.
It was late in the night and those messages were messing with my head and I couldn’t sleep.
Out of frustration, I decided to try and log in to that account by guessing the password.
Alas!
that also didn’t work.

But, when you type in the wrong password Instagram gives you an option to send a login link to your number in case you’ve forgotten the password.
So, I typed in my number hoping the link would get sent to mine.
But it didn’t.
Except, I got a notification that the login link has been sent to the actual number that the account was registered with.
So, since they had censored half the number I could only see the country code and the last 4 digits of it.


Now what took me by surprise is that the country code was neither that of India nor of Muscat.
I am an NRI and have studied abroad for about 18 years, so I have a lot of contacts there and assumed it was someone I knew or someone within my friend’s circle.
The surprising part was the country code was that of Bulgaria, i.e. +359.
I started to rack my brains and think of all the people from Bulgaria that I knew, but I could think of no one.
Moreover, I couldn’t even think of someone who had it this bad against me.

But the subconscious mind is a powerful thing.
It picks up details that you overlook.
I remembered something crucial.
The girlfriend of the guy I was seeing last year is studying abroad.
So, to confirm my doubts I went over to her Instagram page and saw what she had posted.
She had posted a couple of pictures and the location was on it.
I had hit the jackpot – her location was Bulgaria.
However, I still couldn’t confront her as all my clues and doubts were circumstantial.

So, I decided to message her boyfriend (my ex) on Facebook to get a lead on this situation.
but he himself seemed pretty clueless and didn’t know who was behind this.
Moreover, he mentioned receiving a message from a fake account that was demanding pictures of me from him.

All my doubts were confirmed only when his girlfriend (my abuser) saw the exchange between me and him on Facebook (she had his password) and started to abuse and harass me claiming she had private pictures of me and that I was a whore/ slut.
The language she used was extremely disgusting and the stuff she was saying could force a person to end their life.
I chose not to respond to her ugly comments and to ignore it and left a threat there saying I would go to the cops if she didn’t stop this behavior.
My ex refused to involve himself and told me to laugh it off.

Regardless, she chose not to pay heed.
After blocking and reporting her on Instagram and Facebook she got hold of my WhatsApp number and decided to torment me here.
Mind you, I am a 21-year-old who is about to start a new life and the stuff she was saying about me only gave me negative feelings and made me feel helpless.

I knew for a fact that I am not alone and there are lots of people in this world who go through stuff like this.
Some are strong enough to ignore it while some aren’t.
If she was only hurling insults and abuses at me I would have probably ignored her, but she threatened me by saying she had pictures of me and was going to circulate them.
I highly doubt she has pictures of me because she has just been sending me empty threats out of frustration and insecurity.
However, you always have that teeny bit of doubt in your mind if someone has hacked into your phone or warped your pictures and that is just about enough to stop you from doing your daily tasks and screwing with your head.
I’m sure a lot of women would resonate with me.

I am thankful for having such supportive friends who stood up for me during this period.
They confronted her because clearly, my talking to her was useless considering she wouldn’t let me have my say and just try and bully me.
I am a mature individual and did not want to stoop to her level by calling her names and attacking her self-esteem by talking shit about her body.
She is blocked everywhere but I know she is persistent and won’t stop.
I know she is a child and I am better than her but I do not feel sorry for her.
The messages she sent me were outright abusive and she has also broken quite a few laws in India.
(She is an Indian citizen).

I am writing this to educate people that the internet is not a safe place anymore and this can happen to anyone.

My first step was to file a complaint to the cyber cell in Bangalore and they are now looking into it.
I have all the evidence I need to issue an injunction against her or to talk to her parents.
Now since she is abroad, it’s even harder for me to take action.
So, the second thing I did was to email her university and inform them about her doings.
I am now awaiting a response from them.
If that doesn’t stop her, the FIR will.

Finally, the message that I want to give is that don’t keep quiet.
Your abuser is very likely to be someone you know.
Take action.
Not by responding but by collecting evidence and filing a FIR against the person.
Try and be open about your story.
You may receive hate but there will be many others who will resonate and come out and admit that they have been abused.
The bottom line is this, don’t be afraid to ask for help.

If you don’t know who this person is, and it is someone harassing you on Instagram you could use the above-mentioned way to try and find out.
It is not extremely accurate but it might give you some insight.
Always trust your instincts.

If you’re not able to find out who this person is and don’t have the resources to contact professionals or take this to the court, just block this person everywhere and don’t read their messages.
Don’t react.
Just get off all social media and live your life.
Your self-worth does not depend on some person who sits behind a computer and is jealous of you.

On the other hand, if you do find out who this person is, file a FIR.
Present the evidence and wait for things to happen.
That’s the best you can do.
Meanwhile, keep your friends and family close and corner this bully to submission.



####
document number 4: 
The 4Chan of ‘The Sims’


FYI.


This story is over 5 years old.


I was a cyberbully in a community for "The Sims," and I feel really, really bad about it.

"Go kill yourself," I furiously typed in response to someone's simple question about a video game.
I gleefully hit send and laughed as the person on the other end of the internet probably cried.

This is who I was in secret for several years.
A cyberbully.

Who was addicted to

The Sims

.

It all started in 2000 when my boyfriend brought home a copy of the newly released people simulator

The Sims

.
I had grown up playing video games like SimCity, and I quickly fell in love with being able to control digital people's lives.
I bought a copy of

The Sims

for myself and spent entire days playing it.
I spent hours poring over websites looking for custom content for my Sims, and I could hardly contain my excitement the day EA announced the upcoming release of

The Sims 2

.

I bought

The Sims 2

on release day in 2005.
I was enthralled with the new features of the game; the improved graphics; and the living, breathing Sims.
I had no idea that

The Sims

would lead me to cyberbullying.

Some of my most egregious acts included taking over a teenage girl's forum just because I could; participating in the incessant verbal abuse of one user in a chat room, and suggesting other members should kill themselves for being "stupid."

Yes.
I joined a teenage girl's forum, pretended to be her friend, and then pulled the rug out from under her by taking over her forum.
I gained admin access and started talking trash about her until boredom set in.
She was naïve and trusting, which made her easy prey.

I participated in the verbal abuse of one user of our chat room.
This user would reveal something personal about herself, and we'd all use it as excuse to lambast her.
We called this game "harpooning the whale."
I made fun of her late husband and his criminal past; mocked her for her use of social security, food stamps, and disability (even though I believe in the social safety net and have applied for disability myself in the past); called her special needs children "retards;" and took every opportunity to publicly humiliate her.
If it was vicious, slightly true, and mean, I probably said it to her.

I called for suicide when new users dared to ask a simple question.
Even if I knew the answer to the question being asked, I felt that abusing innocents was more important than being helpful.

The forum I did this on, More Awesome Than You!, expected, encouraged, and actively sought this type of behavior.
The official motto of the site was "MOAR FIGHT," and we were known throughout the community as "the 4Chan of The Sims sites."
However, many of us—myself included—took things too far most of the time.

I had two goals when I joined: to make friends with one particularly mean user, and to join the Senate


After

The Sims 2

was released in 2005, a user on the game's official forum discovered a serious bug.
When a character in the game (a "Sim") acquired over 200 memories it would stop responding to commands, give a little jump, and reset itself to idle.
This "jump bug" was discussed on the forum, and a fix was created by the community member who had found it.
EA quickly banned discussion of the "jump bug," and this user set up his own forum for fixing other bugs he found.
To separate his site from other Sims sites, he encouraged fighting, but his abuse was never as cruel as the abuse the favored members of his site heaped upon every newcomer.
He was usually helpful, with a side of snark.

Forum board names included "Retardo Land" and "Be Less Stupid," where off-topic threads were created or moved to.
Boards like "The War Room" and "Peasantry" were where we discussed strategy related to the game, like AwesomeSpec—the supposed ideal layout for a house.
Creative misspellings, such as "strategery" and "learnings," were encouraged; LOL cat speak and memes peppered threads.
Despite this, the forum had a Grammar Police that looked for grammar infractions and lambasted users for misplaced commas.

People came to the site for many reasons.
Most people came for the fixes, which were available free to all, no registration required.
Others came to abuse people, or to bully the bullies.
I came for the fixes first, but stayed for the bullying.
I had two goals when I joined: to make friends with one particularly mean user, and to join the Senate.

The Senate was where the meanest of the members congregated.
They'd pass punishments and "congratulations" on the peasants.
A "congratulation" was the same as a punishment, just snarkier.
Punishments were usually crude, NSFW, cruel, or silly avatars that were affixed to the user's account by the admin and could not be changed.
I was inducted into the Senate in January 2011—three years after I joined the forum.
I was elated to have been accepted by the cool kids.
I didn't realize we were nothing but tyrants, hardly "cool."

The forum wasn't all abuse and snark, though; we often had deep discussions on topics such as religion, politics, and feminism.
These discussions were surprisingly civil, despite covering such hot-button topics.
When they weren't bullying others, most of the regular members were highly intelligent and presented ideas that made me think long and hard about my own beliefs.
I made good friends with good people, and over the years, we have reconnected on more civil sites.
I mostly limited my outbursts to More Awesome Than You.
Occasionally I'd lambast people on my Facebook, but having my real name attached to my comments kept me from going too far.

Most mental health professionals will tell you that bullies, whether in cyber or real life, are sad individuals who tear others down to make themselves feel good.
I can't speak for everyone who has ever bullied, but I can say that this was true for me.
I felt powerful and important by knowing something others didn't.
My cruelty to others made me feel better about my own past when people had been cruel to me.
I had a lot of pent-up anger and frustration that I didn't know how to deal with in a healthy fashion.

I don't know if even my husband knows how cruel I was to these strangers


I kept my cyberbullying habit a secret from most people in my real life.
To the world, I was still the sweet, kind, but moody individual I'd always been.
It was vitally important to me that my two worlds never met so that I could maintain my real life image of being a good person.
I don't know if even my husband knows how cruel I was to these strangers.

These days the site is mostly dead.
Time moves on, interests change, and people come and go.
Some left because the abuse was too much.
Others left because they quit playing the game.
I stayed around because I couldn't bear to leave.
A handful of users still post, but I'm rarely one of them.
I remain as a lurker, a ghost from times gone by.

I do regret my behavior as a cyberbully.
I have apologized to some of the members that I abused while on that site.
The teenager whose forum I ruined is doing well.
I have befriended the "whale," and gained forgiveness for my actions.
Never again will I suggest someone kill themselves.

I've spent several years in therapy learning how to deal with my anger and stress; I'm not there yet, but I'm working on myself and trying to change for the better.
I have faith that with hard work, these issues will be conquered, and I will look back at my days as a cyberbully with the knowledge that it is part of my past instead of part of my now.
I still play

The Sims

sometimes, but mostly out of nostalgia.
I no longer spend days at a time playing with my little digital people.

Perfect Worlds is a series on Motherboard about simulations, imitations, and models.
Follow along here.


By signing up to the VICE newsletter you agree to receive electronic communications from VICE that may sometimes include advertisements or sponsored content.



####
document number 5: 
Bullying, From Both Sides: Former Perpetrator And Former Victim Reflect On Past


(Pixabay)

Editor's Note: This segment discusses suicide, and contains audio that some listeners may find disturbing or offensive.


As we continue our look at a number of aspects of bullying this week,

Here Now

's Jeremy Hobson speaks with a former victim of bullying, Francie Diep (@franciediep), who is now a staff writer at Pacific Standard, who decided to confront the person who bullied her for three years.

Also, we hear from Tyler Gregory, a former cyberbully who now works to protect young people from bullying as a project consultant for the Great American NO BULL Challenge.

Interview Highlights


Francie Diep


On the nature of the cyberbullying she faced

"I had a friend — she was probably my best friend in school at the time — and we had a sort of a falling out.
I don't really know or remember why, and I think she didn't either.
But after we had this falling out, I noticed some things happening in my email.
So I would log into my Yahoo account and all my emails would have disappeared, and sometimes there would be one email left in there with a nasty note to me.
And, the worst thing that happened was that whoever was doing this would leave reminders in my calendar for me to kill myself.
I don't remember exactly how it worked, but I do remember, you know, I would just be browsing on my computer and then I would get this sort of pop-up reminder often late at night.

"I never fully confirmed who it was that did this, but the girl who I had been friends with when I was 13, I knew she had my password.
It was actually because, at some point we were playing on the computer together, and I typed out my password to log into my email account and I had accidentally had my cursor in the username box.
So she saw it and it was an inside joke that was actually between the two of us.
She knew what it meant.
And at the time, in the late '90s, there was no way to change your security questions.
So I would change my password and then, because the security question was also inside joke between us, this girl was able to just change the password to whatever she wanted whenever she wanted to get in, just because no one else would have known the answers to these questions.
She must have been at least involved in one of the break-ins.
But it's possible that she shared, it's possible it wasn't all her, but it had to have started with her."

"Sometimes people ask me if I believe her.
It's hard to know.
It seems incredible that she would not remember, but it's also possible."


On how this affected her

"I was very unhappy.
I think kids are always unhappy in junior high, anyway.
But this didn't help.
As I talked about in my story, I did, at some point, want to die, which sounds very funny for, you know — I was a little girl from a loving family living in a beautiful town in Washington state.
It seemed strange to say that I would have wanted that, but, you know, you don't have a lot of great emotional regulation at 13, 14.
So things seem really serious when things go bad.
I would say I had trouble making friends and like trusting friends afterward, but I made it through.
I got into a college out of state, which is something I really wanted, and went away to college and lived the rest of my life."

On whether she told friends or parents at the time

"I did tell my friends.
I did not tell my parents, which is horrifying when I think about, now, as an adult, I would — that is the scariest thing to imagine being a parent and having a little girl, 13, 14, 15, not tell you when something like this happens.
That said, when I did confront my bully later, she also said she would have never told her parents.
It's hard to get back into that mindset — I guess it's just a strange one, you know, being a 14-year-old girl.
But, at the time, it seemed inconceivable.
I thought that adults would make it worse somehow."

On confronting her cyberbully

"She was on Facebook.
The wonderful thing about social media is that you can never get away from these old people.
She was on Facebook, we had a lot of mutual friends.
You know, we'd gone to junior high and high school together.
I can't remember exactly now how I convinced her, but it took a long time, I remember that, sort of messaging her on Facebook back and forth before she would talk to me.
I tried to get her on the phone, but she never did want to talk on the phone.

"She said at first she didn't remember anything, and then when I sort of told her more details, she sort of admitted to remembering more.
She did admit to breaking into my email.
She said she didn't remember setting the calendar reminders.
Sometimes people ask me if I believe her.
It's hard to know.
It seems incredible that she would not remember, but it's also possible.

"I do feel a lot better.
That's actually not an affect I expected.
I was like, 'OK, I got to do this for the story.'
So I did.
But, in the end, it was amazing."

Tyler Gregory


On his former cyberbullying

"It was my junior year of high school, so it was about seven years ago.
I grew up in a very small town, very rural community, a graduating class of 63 students, and I had my core group of friends.
There was about five of us.
And one of the other friends in this group, his name was Scott, he started hanging out with another girl from a different school, and that didn't really sit well with the rest of the group of friends.
We're like, you know, 'Why isn't he wanting to hang out with us?
Why would he rather hang out with her?'
And so, you know, the four of us, we kind of went on social media and took out our frustration toward this girl whom we had never met.
And, looking back, I'm like, 'How in the world would I have been able to have said some of those things?'
You know, talked about her weight.
We talked about her appearance, and really just to make her feel bad.
I think it really stems from, you know, cyberbullying ... you're not face-to-face with the person you're bullying.
It makes it a lot easier.
You're not seeing the reaction, if there is a reaction.
You're not you know giving them an opportunity to necessarily retaliate unless they message you back or comment on something like that."

On how the cyberbulling ended

"It all came to an end once we were at a fundraising event, and one of the other friends in the group got on the phone and told this girl that, you know, 'The world would be a better place without you.
Why don't you just kill yourself?'
And that really struck a chord with me, because I was like, 'I never really thought about that.
I never thought that the things that we were saying could actually lead to her harming herself.'
And that's really when the bullying stopped after that point.
And Scott, the friend who was hanging out with her, got involved and was like, you know, 'You guys, just everybody stop,' basically.
And that's when things stopped."

"Looking back, I'm like, 'How in the world would I have been able to have said some of those things?'
"


Reflecting on why he was involved

"It was a small school.
So it really was about fitting in.
And it was about, you know, just getting some laughs out of my friends, as messed up as that sounds.
It's very common among schools all over the country now."

On apologizing

"A year later, it was Labor Day weekend.
Scott and I had actually started an anti-bullying campaign and we were at this fair of sorts.
And she happened to be at the festival, and we saw her and we took the opportunity to apologize.
And I'm really glad that we did, because at that time, we were getting a little bit of local media attention for the anti-bullying efforts that we were doing.
She was seeing this on social media and on the news and stuff and it was like, 'This is not the person I know.'
And so it was nice to have the opportunity to apologize.
And she said she was glad that we were doing good work."

On advice for bullies

"My advice for a bully would be to really just take a step back and think about what you're doing.
We don't know what everybody is going through, whether it's our co-workers, our neighbors, the students who we sat next to in class everyday.
We don't know what happens at home.
Even maybe some of your close friends, you might not even realize some of the things that they're going through.
And so we basically have the power to control how people think about us.
You know, when I look back on high school, I remember the people who weren't necessarily so nice, and I remember the people who were extremely nice.
If you have that option to control how people view you, why not choose the positive way?"



####
document number 6: 
Cyberbullying Tragedy: New Jersey Family to Sue After 12-Year-Old Daughter's Suicide


The family of a 12-year-old New Jersey girl — who took her own life after allegedly being cyberbullied by her classmates — is suing the school district, saying Tuesday that administrators were negligent in preventing abuse that led to their daughter's death.

Dianne Grossman said when the school failed to stop the harassment towards her daughter, Mallory, she even tried approaching one alleged bully’s parent, begging the woman to ensure her child would stop.

Her pleas were instantly dismissed, Grossman said.

Video Will Begin In...3


Family to Sue School District After 12-Year-Old Daughter's Suicide


Aug.
1, 201701:51

"I can confidently say I spoke to one of the parents the night before Mallory — before this.
And I can tell you that the mother dismissed it, said it was just a big joke, and that I really shouldn’t worry about it," Grossman said.

It was just one example Grossman gave of the abuse she alleges her daughter was subjected to at Copeland Middle School in Rockaway.

Mallory, a sixth grader at Copeland, took her own life on June 14 after being relentlessly harassed by classmates, Grossman said during a press conference.

Video Will Begin In...3


Parents of Bullied Teen Who Died By Suicide Hope To 'Open A Dialogue'


Aug.
1, 201700:44

During the conference, the Grossmans’ lawyer, Bruce Nagel, said the family is filing an intent to sue Rockaway School District and all the administrators who "ignored months of pleas" from the family.

Let our news meet your inbox.
The news and stories that matters, delivered weekday mornings.

This site is protected by recaptcha Privacy Policy | Terms of Service


"[Mallory’s] life tragically ended when her own classmates used this cellphone to drive her into this tragedy," Nagel said.
"For months there were texts, Snapchat and Instagram — she was told she was a loser, she had no friends.
She was even told, ‘why don't you kill yourself.’"

Rockaway Township School District Superintendent Greg McGann declined to comment to NBC News about the intended suit.

Mallory Grossman.via GoFundMe


Grossman said that her daughter began suffering harassment and bullying at school last October.

"It got to the point where she didn’t want to go to school.
She had chronic headaches, stomach aches," Grossman said.
"Her grades plummeted.
[The school's] focus seemed to be strictly on academics, they weren't concerned with her emotional health."

Related: Suicide Searches Increased After Release of ‘13 Reasons Why’

Grossman said her family talked to guidance counselors, teachers, the vice principal and the principal and was told the school was investigating the matter.

"I‘m going to make the assumption that the school did something, but I’m also going to make the assumption, based on where we are today, that they didn’t do enough," Grossman said.

She said every time she brought her fears to the school, she was dismissed, creating a cycle of inactivity that allowed the bullies to continue "malicious and nasty" behavior.

Nagel said there are "three or four students" that they have identified as Mallory’s bullies, and said the Grossmans are "contemplating taking action against their parents for letting this go on for months."

The family did not publicly identify the alleged bullies.

Video Will Begin In...3


Mother of Cyberbullying Victim Speaks Out


Aug.
1, 201700:40

In a self-assessment given last year, Copeland Middle School gave itself an "A" grade of 94 percent for how it dealt with bullying within the school, according to NBC New York.

However, Grossman alleged the school hasn’t filed a single Harassment, Intimidation Bullying (HIB) report about Mallory's tormentors as required by the New Jersey Department of Education.

"New Jersey has some of the strongest laws around bullying, and to this day a report has still not been filed," Grossman said.

The family plans to file the paperwork declaring their intent to sue this week, and will file the official suit within the next six months.

Morris County Prosecutor’s Office spokesman Fred Snowflack confirmed to NBC News that prosecutors are actively investigating the case, but declined to comment on the suit.



####
document number 7: 
The Suicide of Amanda Todd


Amanda Michelle Todd (died October 10, 2012) was a 15-year-old Canadian teenager who committed suicide attributed to cyber-bullying through the social networking website Facebook.
On 7 September 2012, Todd posted a video on YouTube in which she used a series of flash cards to tell of her experience of being bullied

On 7 September 2012, Todd posted a 9-minute YouTube video entitled

My Story: Struggling, bullying, suicide and self harm

, in which she used a series offlash cardsto tell of her experience of being bullied.
The video post went viral, receiving over 1,600,000 views by 13 October 2012, with online newspapers around the world linking to it.

The following is a summary of statements made in the video: While in seventh grade, Todd met with friends over video chat to meet new people over the internet.
She was complimented with such terms as "stunning", "beautiful", and "perfect".
During one of these sessions, someone wanted her to show her breasts, and she complied.

A year later, an anonymous user left a message on her Facebook profile.
The user knew her address, school, relatives, friends, family name, andblackmailed her.
He demanded a "show" or would "send ur boobs".
At 4 am during Christmas break, police arrived at Todd's door, possibly to inform her that photos of her breasts were circulating on the Internet.
She became sick, started to experience anxiety, major depression and panic disorder.

After moving to a different home, she began to take drugs and alcohol.
Her anxiety worsened, and she couldn't go out of the house.

A year later, the person who had blackmailed her re-entered her life, posting a list of her friends and school.
He used an image of her breasts as his profile picture.
Subsequently, she was ostracized by her peers.
She began self-mutilation by cutting herself.
She changed schools again.
Within the month, her situation had improved, despite her isolation.

A month after that, she began communicating with an "old guy friend".
They exchanged text messages.
He told her that he liked her.
She knew he had a girlfriend.
He invited her to his home while his girlfriend was on vacation, and they engaged in some form of sex.

After a week, she received a text message warning her to get out of school.
The girlfriend and the "old guy friend" with fifteen others came to find her.
During the confrontation, the girlfriend stated "look around nobody likes you", in the presence of approximately 50 other students.
One of the students yelled out for the girl to punch Todd.
The girlfriend then threw Todd to the ground and struck her several times while students filmed it.
Teachers ran to her aid, but she remained in the "ditch", where her father eventually recovered her.

After arriving home, she drank bleach, and was taken to hospital by ambulance for treatment.
Upon returning home, she discovered that the incident was reported on Facebook, with such remarks as "she deserved it", "did you wash the mud out of your hair?
", and "I hope shes dead."

Todd then moved again to live in another city with her mother.
Six months after the incident, people were still posting images of bleach, Clorox, and ditches, and tagging her in them with comments such as "She should try a different bleach", "I hope she dies this time and isn't so stupid.
", and "They said I hope she sees this and kills herself".

She began constantly cutting herself and taking anti-depressants, and was receiving counselling.
Around that time, she had overdosed, and spent two days in hospital.
This is the video:


Don't you know how to properly quote news articles yet?


MisterMackey said: Don't you know how to properly quote news articles yet?


You read this, and that was your primary concern?


Clansman said: You read this, and that was your primary concern?


If the news article were properly quoted, it

might

be easier to read.
Being easier to read, the information might get more attention.


How about making actual posts with content, instead of quoting Wiki or whatever this is.
She killed herself because of sexual online and offline harrassment and bullying.
Now does anyone have anything to contribute, or is this going to be another SB is my personal newsfeed thread?



MisterMackey said: If the news article were properly quoted, it

might

be easier to read.
Being easier to read, the information might get more attention.

I'll keep your reading difficulties in mind during any future responses.



The formatting really hurts my eyes...


Clansman said: I'll keep your reading difficulties in mind during any future responses.


You are so petty.
Anything to get the last word, eh?


I believe that anyone who reads an article like this, watches the video and then fails to take it seriously is, quite frankly, part of the wider problem that resulted in this young lady's suicide.
There should always be consequences for your actions and I'd like the people primarily responsible for hounding this girl to go to jail.
In regards to the person who posted her picture, they are a sexual predator who needs to spend the rest of their life in jail.
It is unlikely that this is their only victim.


Clansman said: I believe that anyone who reads an article like this, watches the video and then fails to take it seriously is, quite frankly, part of the wider problem that resulted in this young lady's suicide.
There should always be consequences for your actions and I'd like the people primarily responsible for hounding this girl to go to jail.
In regards to the person who posted her picture, they are a sexual predator who needs to spend the rest of their life in jail.
It is unlikely that this is their only victim.


Clansman...it's late where I live, I just got back from a birthday party involving lots of beer, I clicked on this thread because it intrigued me but the formatting is really hurting my eyes, 1930'spulpfan has had 40 minutes to fix his post but has decided not to, fuck this thread and fuck your condescension.
This is how my interest in this thread and my potential sympathy died.
Not that...anyone really cares but, ya'know...just FYI.


Pretty nasty stuff but not, sadly, all that unusual.

That said, I am a little surprised she didn't simply scrap her Facebook account.
It may have helped a little at least.
Afterall, a good deal of her anxiety appears to stem from cyber bullying, particularly as she apparently changed city on a couple of occasions.


Clansman said: I believe that anyone who reads an article like this, watches the video and then fails to take it seriously is, quite frankly, part of the wider problem that resulted in this young lady's suicide.
There should always be consequences for your actions and I'd like the people primarily responsible for hounding this girl to go to jail.
In regards to the person who posted her picture, they are a sexual predator who needs to spend the rest of their life in jail.
It is unlikely that this is their only victim.


That's nice for you...you're wrong, but it's nice that you have an opinion.


Dusel said: Clansman...it's late where I live, I just got back from a birthday party involving lots of beer, I clicked on this thread because it intrigued me but the formatting is really hurting my eyes, 1930'spulpfan has had 40 minutes to fix his post but has decided not to, fuck this thread and fuck your condescension.
This is how my interest in this thread and my potential sympathy died.
Not that...anyone really cares but, ya'know...just FYI.


I will consider myself fully informed of your need to have all posts formatted in a manner consistent with your drinking habits.


Clansman said: I will consider myself fully informed of your need to have all posts formatted in a manner consistent with your drinking habits.


So when's the 'I'm a passive aggressive cunt who can't admit that the article was badly formatted' thing going to end?
Because it's already pretty pathetic.


Reece said: So when's the 'I'm a passive aggressive cunt who can't admit that the article was badly formatted' thing going to end?
Because it's already pretty pathetic.


You misunderstand me, I simply think that the formatting is irrelevant when judged against the content.


Clansman said: You misunderstand me, I simply think that the formatting is irrelevant when judged against the content.


No, you're being a passive aggressive cunt who cannot admit that the formatting was shit...and yes it is relevant to the content when the formatting gets in the way of reading the content.
It's why there are unspoken accepted formatting codes on here, why we put things in quotation boxes for easier reading and provide links to check that the OP hasn't simply made shit up, or left out key information.


I think quoting articles without actually contributing anything to the topic can hardly be considered content.
We all read the news.
This is a debate forum.
If you can't express a view to go with your article, then you shouldn't be posting.


What can I say?
Humans are bastards.
If the moon were to explode and rain dinosaur-killing rocks on us all, I'd laugh with joy.


Reece said: No, you're being a passive aggressive cunt who cannot admit that the formatting was shit...and yes it is relevant to the content when the formatting gets in the way of reading the content.
It's why there are unspoken accepted formatting codes on here, why we put things in quotation boxes for easier reading and provide links to check that the OP hasn't simply made shit up, or left out key information.


I think you have confused the ability to criticise someone without swearing at them or calling them names with passive aggression.


Clansman said: I think you have confused the ability to criticize someone without swearing at them or calling them names with passive aggression.


Well no, I'm well aware what being passive aggressiveness is...it's pretty much every one of your posts above this one...and actually includes this one come to think of it.

Although I'm wondering if you know.
I'm willing to wait for you to google it if you want to, I mean you clearly don't know what it means (P.S.
This is being passive-aggressive)



Reece said: Well no, I'm well aware what being passive aggressiveness is...it's pretty much every one of your posts above this one...and actually includes this one come to think of it.
Although I'm wondering if you know.
I'm willing to wait for you to google it if you want to, I mean you clearly don't know what it means (P.S.
This is being passive-aggressive)

I think you have misinterpreted the meaning of passive aggressive, but that doesn't really matter to me.
I think this thread has been de-railed for long enough with our discussions of those who expect others to conform to their personal expectations.



Clansman said: I think you have misinterpreted the meaning of passive aggressive, but that doesn't really matter to me.
I think this thread has been de-railed for long enough with our discussions of those who expect others to conform to their personal expectations.


It's not a personal expectation, it's a maxim of conversation and information transferal in this particular board...though humorously you're now doing the whole 'doesn't matter to me' thing when clearly it does...because you bothered replying, and ironically you're still being a passive aggressive cunt, and I doubt that you even bothered googling it because you know that you're being a passive aggressive cunt.


Reece said: So when's the 'I'm a passive aggressive cunt who can't admit that the article was badly formatted' thing going to end?
Because it's already pretty pathetic.


Probably when you stop dragging it needlessly.


Komarac said: Probably when you stop dragging it needlessly.


Nope, It's hardly down to me that his attitude is that of a passive aggressive cunt...it's down to him...oddly.

(P.S. that was meant to sound condescending, so try reading aloud in a British accent whilst putting stress on the 'oddly')

(P.P.S.
So was that, read that one as though you're talking to a small child...in a British accent.)

(P.P.P.S That one wasn't...this one is.)


Spacebattles: Where the formatting of a 600-word post on a web board is more important than a human life.



####
document number 8: 
The most extensive cyber attack in Hong Kong


From October 1 to the end of October, an international hacker group "Anonymous" has declared a cyber attack campaign called Operation Hong Kong (OpHongKong) against Hong Kong websites.
It was the most extensive and longest territory-wide cyber attack in the history of Hong Kong, targeting websites of government departments, critical organizations, political organizations, press media, and some non-government organizations.

The attack calmed down on around 20-Oct with only isolated attacks carrying on afterwards.

The attackers were quite high profile.
They announced their target websites on social media websites and they openly recruited volunteers to join the attack.
They even provide one-click DDoS (distributed denial-of-service) attack tools so that people without technical know-how could participate.

There were mainly 3 types of attacks in the campaign: web defacement, DDoS attack and intrusion of information systems respectively.
For DDoS attack, attackers used web application attacks, malformed network protocols, SYN flood, volumetric attacks and Wordpress pingback as the means.

According to HKCERT's statistics (https://www.hkcert.org/my_url/en/blog/14102201), from Oct 2 to 22, there were 38 non-government websites defaced and 23 non-government websites attacked by DDoS.
All of them have resumed to normal operation.

Response actions of HKCERT


HKCERT had proactively and promptly responded to the incident in the following ways:


worked closely with the Government and Police round the clock to exchange information and monitored the target sites

informed the public of the attacks immediately and advised them how to secure their systems

informed the victims and advised them on how to recover the affected websites

informed the hosting companies of targets to prepare for the attacks affecting their network

issued takedown requests to administrators whose servers were hosting DDoS attack scripts

warned Internet users not to participate in any cyber attacks.


Some of our blog articles were republished in some IT blogs and discussion forums in Hong Kong to let more people know.
HKCERT would like to express our gratitude to the kind assistance of these blog and forum administrators.

Do Better Security with Lessons Learnt


HKCERT likes to share with you some lessons learnt.
Hope you can prepare better for cyber attacks.


Hactivism, hacking attacks arising from ideological conflict, is no longer a myth in Hong Kong.
There are a lot of collateral damages in cyber attacks related to hacktivism.
For example, when attackers flood the target with huge amount of network traffics, users at the network proximity of the target also suffer network performance degradation.
So users should not view themselves just as a bystander in a cyber attack, they should be more prepared for the adverse consequence of the attacks.

Most victims should not have been compromised, or the impact should have been more limited if they had applied the latest security update to their software and applied proper security defense.

Some users found their computers being utilized to launch attack, causing the network bandwidth being exhausted.
Should they have secured their system and configured their system properly, the impact would have been avoided or more limited.

Some citizens clicked on hyperlinks of DDoS attack tools and became an attacker.
They were later tracked back by law enforcement and even be legally liable.
Citizens are reminded not to attempt to participate in cyber attack which is a criminal offence.

The bright side of the story is, some victims recovered much faster than others.
They have incident response plans in place.
Some put their DNS server and web server behind security service providers and could activate the protection service to mitigate the impacts of security attacks and large volume of flooding traffics.


Here are HKCERT blog articles on the "Operation Hong Kong" cyber attack campaign:



####
document number 9: 
Chinese State Hackers Suspected Of Malicious Cyber Attack On U.S. Utilities



The notorious Chinese state-sponsored hacking group APT10, which is believed to act for the country's Ministry of State Security, is the most likely culprit behind a cyber campaign targeting U.S. utility companies in July.
The disclosure on August 1 was made by researchers at Proofpoint, who warned that "persistent targeting of any entity that provides critical infrastructure should be considered an acute risk—the profile of this campaign is indicative of specific risk to U.S.-based entities in the utilities sector."

The spear-phishing campaign targeted company employees with emails purporting to be from the National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES), emails that claimed to be delivering professional examination results but which were actually delivering "malicious" Microsoft Word attachments.
Threat researchers at Proofpoint broke the news and dubbed the command and control malware "LookBack."

According to Proofpoint's Michael Raggi and Dennis Schwarz, once the emailed Microsoft Word attachment is opened, a malicious VBA macro drops files onto the host computer which then provide the malware with the command and control framework needed to access data on the machine.
The malware can attack and mimic a wide range of processes on an infected machine—primarily, though, the objective is to steal data files and take operational screenshots.


APT10 made headlines in June, when it was reported that the group had compromised the systems of at least ten cellular carriers around the world to steal metadata related to specific users linked to China.
While no firm connection has yet been made between APT10 and this latest attack, Proofpoint's analysts found "similarities" between the macros used in this attack and those found to be targeting the Japanese media sector a year ago.
LookBack "resembles a historic TTP utilized in those campaigns," the researchers explained, albeit the specific malware "has not previously been associated with a known APT actor."

In inferrring a link, the researchers noted the mix and match nature of the coding which suggests "an attempt to evade static signature detection—while maintaining the integrity of the installation mechanism, which had been historically been used to target different sectors and geographies."
In other words, hackers attempting to hide the origins of their code without reducing its effectiveness.

So let's step back.
These are not isolated incidents.
We know there are now organized campaigns on the part of Chinese (and Russian, Iranian and North Korean) hackers to target critical infrastructure, financial services and aerospace and defense.
We know that the current hybrid cyber warfare plays on many levels, and as the U.S. focuses on the military domain, state hackers from enemy states see the wider commercial sectors as far more vulnerable and effective a place to attack.
Week by week, the extent of the vulnerabilities become ever clearer.
And these are in addition to the broad-brush non-targeted nuisance campaigns as seen recently with warnings over Microsoft Outlook.

"While definitive attribution in this instance requires further study," the researchers conclude, "the risk that these campaigns pose to utility providers is clear."
And these campaigns are well-conceived.
An email that claims to be delivering failed examination results compels its recipient.
These are highly-targeted attacks—some are designed to steal significant IP, others to plant vulnerabilities in sectors seen as key to everyday nation-state operations.
Energy, utilities and communications are high on that list.

The wider energy sector has found itself front and center in the hybrid cyber warfare campaign that has extended the battlefield.
In recent months, Russia has been the archvillain of those campaigns.
But China plies its hacking trade widely, and so this latest disclosure comes as little surprise.

In the meantime, back to the specifics.
"The utilization of this distinct delivery methodology," Proofpoint concluded, "highlights the continuing threats posed by sophisticated adversaries to utilities systems and critical infrastructure providers."
There is a malicious campaign underway, it carries risk, and it's far from certain it has now been contained.

APT10—Advanced Persistent Threat 10—is known for long-term, targeted campaigns, harvesting information as might an actual state intel agency.
While the disclosure focuses on the technical make-up of the malware, other questions surrounding the objective of the campaign itself remain unanswered.
And with the malware now ready, there are countless other delivery guises that can be tried.



####
document number 10: 
Caldara: Open negotiations expose intimidation tactics from the Denver teachers’ union


Denver Public Schools and Denver Classroom Teachers Association are back at the negotiation table on Feb.
12, 2019, in Denver.
The two groups met at the Denver Public Library during day two of a teachers strike in Denver Public Schools.



13

As I write this, the Denver teachers’ strike has just ended with a tentative agreement after a productive bargaining session that stretched into the morning hours.

Throughout the negotiations between Denver Public Schools officials and the teachers’ union, we were privy to the offers and counteroffers.
In fact, The Denver Post editorial board opined that the union should accept the bonus structure the district wanted to attract teachers to schools in poor neighborhoods, and the district should accept the concession to fire 150 in administrative staff to make room for more teacher pay.

But how did The Post, or any of us, even know what was flying back and forth over the bargaining table?
We knew because voters pried open the doors to these previously closed, smoky back rooms.

The most important policy a school board makes is its contract with the teachers’ union.
The contract dictates the terms of how most of our children will be taught and how most of our tax money will be spent.
In a way it is comparable to the state legislator’s fights over the "long-bill," the budget bill.
That battle plays out in Joint Budget Committee meetings and floor votes and it decides the priorities for the state government.

Of course, when the legislature negotiates the long-bill they do so in open sessions, in full view of the press and any citizen interested enough to watch in person or stream online.

We call it transparency.
We demand it.

Colorado’s open meetings laws however never included contract negotiations between school districts and a teachers’ unions.
Few ever knew how these decisions were made.
So, in 2014 we at the Independence Institute did something about it.
We gathered enough signatures to force the question on to the ballot as a citizen’s initiative.
The teacher’s union, the Colorado Education Association, and all the organizations that orbit government-run education opposed it.

Still, voters approved Proposition 104 by a jaw-dropping 70 percent "yes" vote.

The issue never needed to go to the ballot box.
Over the previous decade, the state legislature had at least five bills to open these negotiations to the public.
Not one of those bills even made it out of its first committee hearing.

Stew on that.
Seventy percent of voters demanded this kind of basic transparency, yet the state’s public educational industrial complex killed that sunshine, over and over again, before it could even make it to a legislative floor vote.

What was it they didn’t want us to see?
The Denver Public School strike may have answered that question.

Some worried that opening contract negotiations to the press and public would incentivize the union to mobilize their foot soldiers, create a massive show of force and intimidate the district’s negotiating team.
And that’s exactly what the Denver Classroom Teachers Association did.
Well, they tried and it backfired.

At the state Capitol, there are sergeants-at-arms, backed up by state troopers, to make sure activists don’t disrupt the business at hand.
The same applies to police (if needed) at city council meetings, courtrooms, school board meetings, all the way down to liquor board meetings.

Impassioned spectators make their opinion know by their mere presence, not the cat-calling, foot-stomping, yelling behavior we saw from Denver teachers, encouraged by the award-winning soap opera performances by their union reps at the bargaining table.
The mob descended.

I didn’t work to open up negotiations so mobs could take over.

Go online and check it out for yourself.
It will leave any reasonable person concerned to leave their children in the care of those who acted ugly and bullying.
None of those teachers would allow that type of behavior in their own classroom.

Keep in mind these are the same teachers who say they want to be called professionals yet demand to be paid like factory workers while they use mob tactics to disrupt negotiations like it was an Occupy Wall Street protest.
Perhaps the union muscle believes this bullying at the cost of credibility helped them.
Who knows?
You can decide.
The district’s reps didn’t seem intimidated to me.

Fortunately, those harassing teachers don’t represent all teachers.

Teachers, parents, press, and the forgotten taxpayer should be able to witness this important government process at work.
This time around we were treated to a lesson in how the union Goliath likes to act in "good faith."

Other districts should learn from this debacle of decorum and make sure there are sergeants-at-arms present so the adults in the room can get on with the government’s business.

Jon Caldara is president of the Independence Institute, a libertarian-conservative think tank in Denver.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by email or mail.



####
document number 11: 
Podcast Cyber security &amp;amp; Technology news: Binance phishing scam &amp;amp; Oculus Rift Fixed


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


Binance, a cryptocurrency exchange has responded to claims that they were hacked and show that it was in fact a clever phishing scam, not a hack.
Oculus rift, which we discussed yesterday has fixed their issue making oculus rift headsets work again.

IN THIS EPISODE


Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Planet Zuda, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 12: 
The ANU hack came down to a single email — here's what we know


ANU has released a 5,000-word report detailing an unprecedented hack on the university.
(ABC News: Niki Challis)


Without anyone clicking on a link, a massive cyber attack of unprecedented sophistication gained access to private information of potentially high-ranking officials across the globe.

Thanks to the release of a 5,000-word report into the incident, the public can see for the first time how sophisticated and extensive the attack on the ANU was.

For weeks, hackers quietly trawled through the computer system of the Australian National University (ANU) in Canberra.

It was months before ANU even realised the hackers had broken in, and almost a year later it remains a mystery just how damaging the attack was.

What is known is personal details were taken from a university that's educated some of the best and brightest people.

What was taken?


A forensic investigation of the hack has been unable to determine the full extent of the attack.

That's largely the result of the hackers being meticulous, clearing their tracks and leaving very little evidence for investigators to sift through.

Investigators have determined that names, addresses, phone numbers, dates of birth, emergency contact details, tax file numbers, payroll information, bank account details and student academic records were stolen.

The database that was accessed held 19 years' worth of records but the investigators believe only a fraction of the available information was taken.

In getting to the personal information, the hackers bypassed intellectual property and research information.

Investigators believe this information remained untouched.

ANU vice chancellor Brian Schmidt says the cyber attack was extremely "sophisticated".


Who was responsible?


The ANU believes up to 15 people were involved in the hack but says it doesn't have enough evidence to blame any one country and isn't ruling out organised crime.

Vice chancellor Brian Schmidt argued it could be "a whole bunch of countries" behind the attack but a senior analyst with the Australian Strategic Policy Institute thinks there's one obvious culprit.

"It's likely to be China, frankly, they've got strong interests in Australia for a number of different reasons," Tom Uren said.

"We're part of the Five Eyes alliance so there's a relationship with American military and intelligence.
Canberra is the heart of government and there's many students at the ANU that go on to work in government.

"Plus, there's also a lot of Chinese students who come to Australia to study and one theory that's been told to me is that perhaps the Chinese Government wants to keep tabs on what its students in Australia are doing as well."

There is no evidence that the information has been used by criminals for identity fraud to date.

One of the spear phishing emails sent to ANU staff, inviting them to provide support on common issues in the region.
(Supplied: Australian National University)


How did they do it?


On November 9, 2018, the hackers sent an email to a senior staff member at the ANU.

Another staff member, who had access to their colleague's account, previewed the email but never clicked on it.

Read more


Even though the email was deleted, it was too late to stop the hackers, who had already accessed the senior staff member's username, password and calendar.

Once in, the hackers mapped the ANU computer network to get an understanding of how everything was connected.

The second stage of emails included a targeted mailout to 10 people at ANU, inviting them to attend an event at the university.

The hackers also accessed a directory that houses usernames, emails, phone numbers and job titles to better understand people's roles and responsibilities within the university.

As the hackers gained more information, they sent out more emails to ANU accounts, ultimately gaining the username and password of at least one network administrator.

This allowed them to extend the reach of their attack.

Routine maintenance temporarily kicked the hackers out but within weeks they were back in stealing more information.

The hackers were ultimately kicked out on December 21 and future attempts to get back into the network failed.

Kevin Rudd and Marty Natalegawa are among the high-profile politicians who have studied at ANU.
(Supplied: Australian Government)


Why hack ANU?


Based mere kilometres from the Federal Parliament, the ANU has a global reputation as being an institute of choice for future leaders.

The ANU prides itself on being home to the best and brightest — both in its student and academic ranks.

It's the university of choice for an Australian wanting to become a diplomat, and has trained senior leaders that now work for governments and private organisations across the globe.

The ANU is home to the National Security College and prides itself on a large international student community.

Former and present prime ministers and premiers and senior military leaders have studied there, including Bob Hawke, Kevin Rudd, Annastacia Palaszczuk and Barry O'Farrell.

Indonesia's former foreign minister Marty Natalegawa and former New Zealand opposition leader and governor of the Reserve Bank Don Brash studied at ANU.

They represent just the tip of an iceberg of bureaucrats, past and present, now in senior government roles internationally.

Senior analyst Tom Uren says the most likely culprit is China.


Are the details safe now?


This wasn't the first hack on the university but it proved the most damaging and ANU has spent millions upgrading its computer network.

Professor Brian Schmidt said he hoped universities, organisations and individuals would learn from ANU's experience.

A copy of the report has been issued to a university foreign interference taskforce, which aims to provide better protection for universities against foreign interference.

The attack on ANU was possible because of the university's old computer network, rather than the result of a single user not downloading a security upgrade.

Despite ANU's upgrades, the Australian Cyber Security Centre warns a computer network is never 100 per cent secure in the face of a growing industry of hackers keen to steal information.

It wants all Australians, from individuals to organisations, to take the threat seriously and ensure they're adequately protected.



####
document number 13: 
TalkTalk cyber-attack: County Londonderry man targeted



TalkTalk said the website was taken down as soon as it noticed "unusual activity"


A County Londonderry man has warned TalkTalk customers to be vigilant after hackers purporting to be from the company tried to con him out of £5,000.

Police are investigating a "significant and sustained cyber-attack" on the phone and broadband provider's website.

Talktalk said it was too early to know who had been affected by the attack.

The Northern Ireland man received a call on 16 October from a woman who said she wanted to investigate problems with his internet connection.

She then attempted to steal more than £5,000 from his bank account.

The man, who wished to remain anonymous, was asked to switch on his computer so that the problem could be resolved by remote access.

Suspicious about the caller's intentions, he asked for proof that she was a legitimate TalkTalk employee.

'Warranty expired'


When she was able to relate all of the man's account details, he was reassured.

"I naively believed only TalkTalk employees could have access to information like that," he said.

"At the end of the day, when I had problems before, it was resolved over the phone by an IT person who took control by remote access, so I went ahead and keyed in her various instructions on my keyboard.

"I didn't realise that what I was actually doing was disenabling any anti-viral software on my computer so that they could hack me.

"Eventually, she drew my attention to what looked like a message from TalkTalk, on the bottom of the screen, saying my warranty had expired.


A criminal investigation is under way after the cyber attack


"She said that this was the source of the problem and apologised on behalf of the company for allowing it to expire.
She told me they would renew the warranty and in the meantime they would compensate me with £200."

But when the man checked his bank account, he noticed that a lodgement of £5,200 had been made.

"When I told her this, she got very upset, telling me that she had made a mistake and leading me to believe that she was going to get into serious trouble with her employers.

"The alarm bells began to ring when she asked me if I could transfer the money back through the post office, to an account that wasn't TalkTalk, without telling the post office what had happened.

"So I went straight to my bank to find out what was going on."

'Sympathy or fear'


The bank informed him that the £5,200 had actually been transferred from his main account into his joint account and warned him that TalkTalk customers had been targeted in this way before.

Although the fraudsters were ultimately unable to access the man's money, he said the experience caused him huge stress.

"It's a terrible feeling knowing that people would be so manipulative," he said.

"The fraud expert I spoke to since said that these people use tactics to provoke sympathy or fear.
He described it as 'social engineering'.

"I would just appeal to others to be very cautious, not just now, but in the months ahead."

He also expressed frustration at the lack of support offered to him by TalkTalk.

"I tried to get through to them on Friday to explain what happened and I was put through to a call centre in Capetown, where I was told the systems were down.

"I tried again on Sunday but the person on the other end seemed to struggle to understand me and couldn't offer me any proper explanation or solution to the fact that I now have a broken computer."

The phone and broadband provider, which has more than four million UK customers, said on Friday that potentially all of their customers could be affected but it was too early to know what data had been stolen.

The Metropolitan Police said no-one had been arrested over Wednesday's attack but enquiries were ongoing.

TalkTalk said in a statement that a criminal investigation had been launched on Thursday.

It said there was a chance that some of the following customer data, not all of which was encrypted, had been accessed:


Names and addresses


Dates of birth


Email addresses


Telephone numbers


TalkTalk account information


Credit card and bank details



Cyber security consultant and former Scotland Yard detective Adrian Culley told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that a Russian Islamist group had posted online to claim responsibility for the attacks.

He said hackers claiming to be a cyber-jihadi group had posted data which appeared to be TalkTalk customers' private information - although he stressed their claim was yet to be verified or investigated.



####
document number 14: 
Phishing Case Studies: How Attackers are Taking their Time, and Taking your Money


We, the users of the Internet, have been the targets of phishing scams for over 20 years.
Early instances include AOHell (circa 1995 – when the term "phishing" first took off) and the LoveBug (early 2000), which spammed victims’ address books.
While these early phishing attacks were decidedly simplistic, today’s phishing attacks are far more advanced and difficult to stop.
With a higher volume of high-value data stored online, our money, identities, and critical corporate data are all at risk.
The stakes are much higher now than in the mid-90s.

Despite having two decades to figure out how to foil phishing scams, a remarkably high percentage are still successful.
And email phishing is still the dominant attack form, with 44% of 2016 incidents social in nature (these email phishing scams are also the top delivery vehicle for malware and ransomware).
So why are they still so successful?
One reason is because phishing attacks prey on our human nature.
Attackers are betting that we’ll click before we report, that we’ll trust rather than verify, and that we’ll respond to any email that has our corporate logo at the top.
At the heart of that problem is a serious lack of training.
We’ve also seen a rise in highly sophisticated, slow-burn attacks.
Malicious attackers are spending more time creating personalized campaigns that target high value data and employees, sometimes investing many months into the research and planning of the attacks.

As a company that offers social engineering services and customized cyber awareness trainings, we’ve spent years tracking phishing trends and developing strategies to stop them.
Recently, though, we’ve seen several novel phishing schemes (including one by our own social engineering team) that highlight the way these attacks are changing.

Disclaimer: For the privacy and safety of the companies we research and work with, we have redacted or changed company names, locations, and industries in the following accounts.


Lesson 1: Phishing Attacks Rely on Our Click-First Mentality


After falling victim to a recent spear phishing attack, a company requested that we assess the control breakdowns and help prevent similar attacks in the future.
It quickly became clear to our team that this attack was successful because employees were too click-happy.
Rather than taking the time to scrutinize emails and report suspicious behaviors, employees clicked… and clicked… and clicked… and caused some serious damage.

In these employees’ defense, this was no simple phishing attack – but that’s the point.
Today’s phishing attacks aren’t simple.
Hackers are spending days, weeks, even months researching companies and crafting personalized emails that resonate with their targets.
Let’s take a look at the three phases of this attack.

Phase 1: Planning


The goal of this attack was to gain access to employees’ payroll information, change their bank account numbers to offshore accounts, and intercept their paychecks.
Through some light research, the hackers figured out the dates for spring break for most schools in the target area, as well as the dates when the company was likely to process payroll.
The attackers set this as the window for their attack.
With many employees out of the office, the attack would be more difficult to detect and more difficult to stop.

With their timeframe in place, the attackers needed to gain access to at least one employee’s email to start their campaign.
To do this, they set up a fake email account that emulated the email address of the CEO and sent a simple phishing email to a handful of employees.
Most didn’t take the bait, but one did – and that’s all they needed.

The email asked her to review a Word document.
But in order to read it, she had to provide authentication credentials – a somewhat unusual but not unheard of request.
Once the attackers had her credentials, they lurked in her inbox, gathering information about the company.



Screenshot of the fake login page used to gather employee credentials




As you can see in the above screenshot, the hackers weren’t sloppy with their initial email campaign.
The attachment looked official, complete with impeccable grammar, and the fake login page was sold with official Microsoft logos.

Phase 2: Execution


After some time passed, the hackers used the breached employee’s account to launch an email campaign on behalf of the CEO, asking employees to update their Workday credentials (the company’s payroll system) before the next pay period began.

Knowing that a massive email campaign would spark suspicion, they sent the emails in small waves.
They also created a special folder in her inbox that intercepted replies, which the attackers monitored to erase responses and keep the account owner unaware.

The hackers also took special care in crafting the perfect email.
In the first wave, they sent emails that had flawless grammar, used familiar syntax, and mimicked a corporate tone.

Phase 3: Success


Once the emails were sent, employees started clicking.

By the end of the fourth wave, 50+ employees had clicked the link and submitted their Workday credentials.
With access to their Workday accounts, the attackers changed employee banking information to offshore accounts, and routed the payroll checks through those accounts and onto other places.

Beyond the phishing emails, what broke down?
Well, the manual control within the payroll department – one that requires a payroll employee to manually "Approve" each account change – was not sufficient.
Despite receiving 50+ account change requests in one pay period (for a company that averages 10 in that span), the payroll employee did not sound the alarm.

In total, the hackers stole around $120,000.

Lesson Learned


After meeting with the company, we learned that they had not performed social engineering prior to this attack, and their cyber awareness training had room for improvement.
This lack of training and testing left employees unaware of how to recognize sophisticated malicious behavior or report suspicious emails.

Improved cyber awareness training with clear processes on how to report unusual emails or behaviors as well as regular testing to heighten employees’ vigilance can change the "click-first" mentality.
In addition, implementing a tool that identifies emails from an external source can help employees take the time to stop and evaluate whether it’s from a trusted source.

Lesson 2: Phishing Attacks are Successful Because We Prefer to Trust Rather Than Verify


A company recently requested that we help them trace a phishing attack that resulted in the theft of more than $200,000.
After diving in, we concluded that this organization – which relies heavily on third parties – was attacked through a breach at one of its vendors.

Disguised as a third party, the hackers sent the company’s finance team an invoice for $212,000 with a new ACH number.
Production was under way and an invoice for this amount was expected.
The hackers explained away the new ACH number by citing routine changes in the accounting department of the company.

Rather than verifying this change with an approved contact, the company paid the invoice with the new ACH number.

However, a few weeks later, the

real

vendor reached out and asked for their payment.
They wanted the $212,000 payment before they finished production.
When the company went back to check their records, they discovered that the email they received a few weeks prior was actually from comp@connpanyname.com rather than comp@companyname.com (notice the subtle change in the domain), and that their payment went to a bank account in Kuala Lampur while the vendor was based in mainland China.

Lesson Learned


In this case, it’s pretty clear that the company’s third-party vendor had been breached and the attackers were leveraging the data they gained through this breach for even greater financial gain.
While this allowed the attackers to craft a very targeted campaign, a verification process for changes to vendor information could have helped foil this attack.
In addition, a robust vendor risk management program could have given the company a better understanding of its vendors’ security and privacy policies and procedures.

Lesson 3: Personalization is Playing a Big Role in the Success of Phishing Attacks


A company recently requested that we test their cyber resiliency to phishing attacks.
This time, we got to be the hackers, and using publicly available information from their website and sources like LinkedIn, we were able to craft a very customized campaign, which yielded a high success rate.

After creating a fake LinkedIn account, our team connected with nearly 800 employees at this company and leveraged the info on these pages to build an email list.
In accordance with our pre-determined rules of engagement, our team built an email that targeted recipients on a personal level.



Body of the phishing email used to gather employee credentials in this social engineering campaign




The email notified select employees that they had been nominated for an employee recognition award.
In order to receive their award (an Amazon gift card), the employees were told they needed to agree to the terms and conditions.
Upon clicking the link, they were brought to a cloned version of the company SSO page (the URL was just one letter different from the company’s official SSO page) and asked to enter their credentials.

The emails went to 450 employees.
Nearly 250 opened the email, and more than 130 logged in.
Once they logged in, employees were taken to a landing page that mimicked the corporate website where they downloaded the T as a Microsoft Word document.

The document prompted employees to enable macros in order to view it in its entirety.
Macros are disabled by Word by default, but the document included step-by step-instructions to allow them, which a number of employees followed without question.

Those who enabled the macros kicked off a PowerShell script that sent an outbound connection to an outside server that requested the full payload.
While a corporate security tool blocked a number of these connections, 19% of the connections were still successful.
This granted our team command-line access to the host as the compromised users, giving us access to a number of valuable internal resources.

On top of all of this, a number of employees who received these emails responded to them and asked for technical assistance.
Our team asked 18 of them for their login details in order to assist, and three of them obliged.
Had we chosen to, we could have leveraged this position of technical authority for further campaigns.

Lesson Learned


A lot can be learned about a company and its corporate identity from very public sources like social media.
Hackers are able to leverage email conventions, titles, and company branding from these sources to build highly customized campaigns that make it extremely difficult for employees to detect suspicious behavior.
This example highlights the importance of testing employees so they are aware of the evolving tactics attackers are using, and then building robust training on how to recognize and report these attacks.
This training should include best practices for social media, like evaluating connection requests on LinkedIn and regularly reviewing and updating personal privacy settings.

Want more fascinating case studies like this?


Subscribe to Focal Point's Risk Rundown below - a once-a-month newsletter with templates, webinars, interesting white papers, and news you may have missed.
Thousands of your colleagues and competitors have signed up!
You can unsubscribe at any time.



####
document number 15: 
Kidnapped by a paedophile I met online




Alicia Kozakiewicz was 13 years old when she slipped out of her home in Pittsburgh to meet someone she had been chatting to online.
What followed was a nightmare.
Now 27, Alicia has made it her mission to protect other children from what she went through, and has had a law named after her in several US states.
This is her story in her own words.

I remember the Christmas of 2001 was really wonderful and so was the first half of New Year's Day 2002.

New Year has always been a day of celebration for my family.
We'd have a big meal - my mum would make pork and sauerkraut - and that year my mum was there, my dad, my brother, his girlfriend and my grandmother, and these are the last moments of my childhood that were peaceful.
Where I was just Alicia.

At some point between dinner and dessert I asked my mother if I could go and lie down.
I said I had a stomach ache.


The next thing I knew I was in a car with this man, and immediately I feared for my life



But what happened was that I got up and slipped past the Christmas tree which was by the front door, and I opened the front door to meet this person that I thought was my friend.

This wasn't in my character at all.
I was a child that was really scared of the dark and I hated the cold - I still really hate the cold - and I never went outside alone after dark without an adult.

I remember walking up the street just about a block or so and the streets were covered in ice and there was nobody out.
What I remember most is the silence.
How silencing snow can be.
There were no dogs barking, there wasn't anything other than the snow crunching under my feet.
I remember standing on the corner and this little voice finally spoke up - my intuition - and said, "Alicia what are you doing?
This is really dangerous you need to go home."

I turned around and started walking back, but then I heard my name being called - and the next thing I knew I was in a car with this man, and immediately I feared for my life.


Sitting at the family computer, aged 13


My childhood up to that point had been an amazing one.
For most of my childhood my mum stayed at home, so she was there with me all the time, whenever I needed her, and so was my brother who is nine years older than me.

My dad worked really long hours but he always left space for family time.
So we were - and still are - a very close family.
My childhood was filled with so much fun.


People online may be strangers at first, but then you learn about them, and soon they seem like friends



Recently I had my old home movies transferred to digital and I've been going through them.
Looking back I was just a really happy kid.
I thought that people sang like they do in Disney movies, I just thought that was how people lived, so I was always singing to the trees or the rocks or to my shoes because I thought that was how happy people expressed themselves.
And I was really saddened to find out that the world was not like a musical where everybody dances and everybody sings.

It was my older brother who introduced me to the internet.
He was always playing games online, I think Diabolo was one of them.
I wasn't interested in that particular game, but it did look like a board game and I realised that the internet was a great way to play these games with other people.
That's really all I thought it was.

At that time the internet was really just entering the home and my parents had thought that they had given my brother and me this wonderful gift.
They had talked to me about "stranger danger" but there is a difference between a stranger you meet on the street and the stranger you meet online.
People online may be strangers at first, but then you learn about them, and soon they seem like friends.

Find out more

Alicia Kozakiewicz spoke to PM on Radio 4.
Click here to hear to listen.

In 2001 and 2002 there were very few people educating children that the internet could be dangerous.

I got a screenname and got online.
My friends and I would talk about all sorts of things.
It seemed like a time before kids realised that cyber bullying was a possibility and it seemed like everyone got along online.
The most popular kids would talk to the less popular kids.
I felt safe.

There was one guy, a boy who I thought was around my own age, that I didn't know, and he was into all the things that I was into.
He listened to what I had to say day and night, giving me advice.
He was somebody to complain to and to get comforted by over the eight or nine months before my abduction.
Online grooming is very effective.

He was the one I walked out to see on New Year's Day and who kidnapped me in his car.



He was grabbing my hand so tightly that I thought it was broken and he was barking commands at me.
Things like, "Be good, be quiet!"
If I didn't obey, he said, he would put me in the trunk.

He sped off down my street and past my house.
I thought, "Maybe he'll just drive around the block."
Then, "Maybe he'll just drive to the next neighbourhood."
I paid attention to the street signs and they went from being very familiar names to names that I couldn't recall being anywhere near my home.

After some time the car reached a toll booth and in my mind I remember thinking, "This is my chance, this is when I'm going to be rescued because this person in the booth is going to see a crying child and think, 'What is going on?'
And call the police and this whole thing will be over."

But the man in the toll booth didn't see me or think that there was anything wrong, and the car sped on.


He then removed my clothing and looked at me and said, 'This is going to be really hard for you - it's OK, cry'



I remember looking out of the window and seeing the phone boxes and thinking, "What if I could get to one of them, what would I say to my family?
How could I get out of this, let them know that I'm in danger?"

There are no words to explain the fear and terror of thinking this person could pull over and kill me at any moment.
He continued to drive for about five hours from my Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania home to Virginia.
Finally, the car stopped, he pulled me out of the car and dragged me into this house - and continued to drag me down a flight of stairs that seemed to go on forever in my mind.
I'm sure it was a flight or two but it felt like it was an endless maze.

Once he'd got me into the basement, there was a door with a padlock on it and he took me inside.
On the walls were all these devices that my 13-year-old mind just couldn't comprehend.

He then removed my clothing and looked at me and said, "This is going to be really hard for you.
It's OK, cry."

After that he put a locking dog collar around my neck and dragged me upstairs to his bedroom and raped me.
He chained me to the floor with this dog collar next to the bed.
I was raped and beaten and tortured in that house for four days.

I have to tell you that it's amazing the response I get sometimes when I say that.
Sometimes people say, "You're so lucky, that's not that long."
They really have said that.
I want to make it clear that you cannot define pain by time, or what happened, it's how the experience affects the person.
It's how it impacted them.
Whether you're held captive for four days or abused by somebody you love for years, or molested for 15 seconds on a bus, it's your experience and your pain that defines it, not the length of time and not what actually occurred.

While I did what I could to survive, no matter how humiliating or painful or disgusting, I had no control over my fate.
When I did fight him I ended up with a broken nose.
And he'd already kidnapped a child, he'd already done unspeakable things to me, why would murder be something that he couldn't do?

On the fourth day he said: "I'm beginning to like you too much.
Tonight we're going to go for a ride."
I knew in that moment there was nothing I could do.
I knew he was going to kill me.
That day he also fed me for the first time in four days and he left for work.


A man ordered me to crawl out from beneath the bed and to put my hands up



I remember crying and praying, really praying and I thought about all the things I would do if I were stronger, if I were a character in a superhero movie.
I thought, "He's going to kill me, but I'm not going to go down without a fight and maybe I could win?"
But then I realised that I'd already lost many times.
I soon lost all hope.

I thought about my parents a lot over those days.
I knew that they were looking for me and that they loved me.
I had no doubt in my mind that they would find me.
They could move mountains, and they would do anything to keep me safe.
I knew they wouldn't stop until they found me.
The question was whether they would find me alive, or dead.
I thought: "When was the last time that I told them I loved them?
Did they know how much I loved them?"

I started to accept my own death.
I drifted into a dazed sort of state.
But then I heard the sound of angry men banging on the door downstairs.
Because I'd lost all hope I thought they were there to kill me, so I rolled underneath the bed to try to hide from them and stayed as quiet as possible.
I heard them moving very quickly around the house.
I also heard them shout, "Clear!
Clear!
Clear!
Clear!"
Now, I would know exactly what that meant but at that time I had no idea.



I must have made some noise because I heard a man say, "Movement over there!"
I saw boots come along the side of the bed.
A man ordered me to crawl out from beneath the bed and to put my hands up.
I remember dragging that cold, heavy chain out, and trying to put my hands up but also trying to cover myself at the same time.
I had no clothing on.
I was staring down the barrel of a gun.

I thought, "This is when I'm going to die.
This is it."
Then the man turned around and I saw FBI on the back of his jacket, and all of these law enforcement agents rushed into the room.
They cut the chain from around my neck and helped me up.
They set me free.
They gave me a second chance at life.
These men and women, they are my angels.

While I was held captive, my kidnapper broadcast himself abusing me online.
One of the viewers recognised the little girl in this horrible video as the little girl from the missing posters.
It is important to note, that the greater majority of children are rescued due to missing posters and alerts released on the internet, radio, TV, highway signs, digital billboards, mobile phones and so on.

If you come across a missing person flyer, please pay attention.


The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children in Virginia


The viewer went to a phone box, called the FBI, and gave them the screenname of the abuser.
Through this, the FBI found his IP address which led to me.
It was a miracle.
Essentially, one monster came forward about another.
I'm so lucky.
Had those law enforcement officers stopped for coffee, or had their car broken down, I might not be here with you now.
He was due to arrive back to his house at 4.30pm and the law enforcement arrived at 4.10pm.
This is the perfect example why, when a child is missing, every single second counts.

Even today, people are shocked when they hear a story like mine.
In 2002, when I was kidnapped, it seemed impossible for them to understand how this happened and that I was groomed.
Simply, they blamed the victim, which sadly, is not much different from sexual assault cases of present day.
However, there were those that were supportive and I hope they know how much I appreciate their care and concern.

My family and I vowed that we would make a difference and help to save other children and families.
We realised that a factor of this ordeal was that no internet safety education was being taught in schools.
After my own period of healing, at the age of 14, I began going into schools, giving presentations, and sharing my story.
Today, nearly 14 years later, I am continuing my mission, sharing my story with people around the globe, and advising families on internet safety.



Additionally, I work alongside Protect to secure the passage of, Alicia's Law, named after me, in all 50 states of the US.
Due to a lack of dedicated federal resources, less than 2% of known child exploitation cases are being investigated.
Alicia's Law provides a dedicated steady stream of state-specific funding to the Internet Crimes Against Children (ICAC) Task Forces.
By creating this new revenue stream, Alicia's Law builds permanent capacity for child rescue teams - revenue that will not fall victim to yearly fights over or cuts to the general budget.

Alicia's Law has been passed in Virginia, California, Idaho, Kentucky, Texas, Tennessee, Arizona, Hawaii, and Washington.
We are currently working on Alicia's Law in Wisconsin, Maryland, and South Carolina.

I am now working on a masters degree in forensic psychology and am graduating in just a few months (yay!).
I plan to work with children and their families who have been affected by abduction or child sexual exploitation.

For years I struggled with personal relationships.
The most loving gentle touches could suddenly seem evil and full of harm.
But, the day after I graduate I am getting married (bigger yay!).
My fiance supports my mission and he is a great guy but above all he is a great friend.

What is really important to remember, and took a long time for me to learn, is that rape is all about power and control, and love never is.

In 2003 Alicia Kozakiewicz's kidnapper, Scott Tyree, pleaded guilty to taking a minor across state lines for the purpose of sex and producing sexually explicit images.
He was sentenced to 19 years and seven months in prison.



Subscribe to the

BBC News Magazine's email newsletter

to get articles sent to your inbox.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = disease outbreak
document number 1: 
2014-2016 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa


The 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak in West Africa has ended.
Visit the Ebola Outbreak section for information on current Ebola outbreaks.

On March 23, 2014, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported cases of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in the forested rural region of southeastern Guinea.
The identification of these early cases marked the beginning of the West Africa Ebola epidemic, the largest in history.

Summary


The initial case, or index patient, was reported in December 2013.
An 18-month-old boy from a small village in Guinea is believed to have been infected by bats.
After five additional cases of fatal diarrhea occurred in that area, an official medical alert was issued on January 24, 2014, to the district health officials.
The Ebola virus soon spread to Guinea’s capital city of Conakry, and on March 13, 2014, the Ministry of Health in Guinea issued an alert for an unidentified illness.
Shortly after, the Pasteur Institute in France confirmed the illness as EVD caused by

Zaire ebolavirus

.
On March 23, 2014, with 49 confirmed cases and 29 deaths, the WHO officially declared an outbreak of EVD.

Weak surveillance systems and poor public health infrastructure contributed to the difficulty surrounding the containment of this outbreak and it quickly spread to Guinea’s bordering countries, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
By July 2014, the outbreak spread to the capitals of all three countries.
This was the first time EVD extended out from more isolated, rural areas and into densely populated urban centers, providing an unprecedented opportunity for transmission.

On August 8, 2014, WHO declared the deteriorating situation in West Africa a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), which is designated only for events with a risk of potential international spread or that require a coordinated international response.
Over the duration of the epidemic, EVD spread to seven more countries: Italy, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Later secondary infection, mainly in a healthcare setting, occurred in Italy, Mali, Nigeria, and the United States.

The scope of this outbreak, both in terms of cases and geography, can be attributed to the unprecedented circulation of EVD into crowded urban areas, increased mobilization across borders, and conflicts between key infection control practices and prevailing cultural and traditional practices in West Africa.
Engaging local leaders in prevention programs and messaging, along with careful policy implementation at the national and global level, helped to eventually contain the spread of the virus and put an end to this outbreak.

Liberia was first declared Ebola-free in May 2015.
Additional cases were found and treated, and the country was again declared Ebola-free in September 2015.
More cases were discovered in November 2015.
On January 14, 2016, Liberia again announced it was Ebola-free; however, cases were detected in March and April of 2016, and Liberia made its final declaration on June 1, 2016.

After an initial declaration in November 2015, Sierra Leone announced a new case of EVD in January 2016 and declared it was Ebola-free on March 17, 2016.
In Guinea, the first end of outbreak declaration was in December 2015, but additional cases were discovered in March and April of 2016.
Guinea was finally declared Ebola-free in June 2016.
[1] Two and a half years after the first case was discovered, the outbreak ended with more than 28,600 cases and 11,325 deaths.

Ebola in the United States


Overall, eleven people were treated for Ebola in the United States during the 2014-2016 epidemic.
On September 30, 2014, CDC confirmed the first travel-associated case of EVD diagnosed in the United States in a man who traveled from West Africa to Dallas, Texas.
The patient (the index case) died on October 8, 2014.
Two healthcare workers who cared for him in Dallas tested positive for EVD.
Both recovered.

On October 23, 2014, a medical aid worker who had volunteered in Guinea was hospitalized in New York City with suspected EVD.
The diagnosis was confirmed by the CDC the next day.
The patient recovered.

Seven other people were cared for in the United States after they were exposed to the virus and became ill while in West Africa, the majority of whom were medical workers.
They were transported by chartered aircraft from West Africa to hospitals in the United States.
Six of these patients recovered, one died.

[2]


CDC Response


CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center in July 2014 to help coordinate technical assistance and disease control activities with partners.
CDC personnel deployed to West Africa to assist with response efforts, including surveillance, contact tracing, data management, laboratory testing, and health education.
CDC staff also provided support with logistics, staffing, communication, analytics, and management.

To prevent cross-border transmission, travelers leaving West Africa were screened at airports.
Exit screening helped identify those at risk for EVD and prevent the spread of the disease to other countries.
The United States also implemented enhanced entry screening for travelers coming from Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Mali by routing them to designated airports better able to assess travelers for risk.

[3]


During the height of the response, CDC trained 24,655 healthcare workers in West Africa on infection prevention and control practices.

[4]

In the United States, more than 6,500 people were trained during live training events throughout the response.
In addition, laboratory capacity was expanded in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone with 24 laboratories able to test for Ebola virus by the end of 2015.

[5]


Impact


On March 29, 2016, the WHO lifted the PHEIC status on West Africa’s Ebola situation.
The impact this epidemic had on the world, and particularly West Africa, is significant.
A total of 28,616 cases of EVD and 11,310 deaths were reported in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
There were an additional 36 cases and 15 deaths that occurred when the outbreak spread outside of these three countries.
The table below shows the distribution of cases and deaths in countries with widespread transmission and countries affected by the epidemic.




3,814


3,358


2,544




10,678


3,163


4,810




14,124


8,706


3,956




20


19


8




28,652


15,261


11,325





* While there were 11 patients with EVD in total treated in the United States, only four patients became ill after they arrived in the United States, either after exposure in West Africa or in a healthcare setting.

Graphs of reported cases, called epidemic curves, show the rate (incidence) of new, probable, and confirmed cases over the duration of the outbreak in the three West African countries with widespread transmission, Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.

Healthcare workers caring for patients with EVD were among those at highest risk for contracting the disease.
During the epidemic, Liberia lost 8% of its doctors, nurses, and midwives to EVD.

[6]

In addition to the devastating effects on the healthcare workforce in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, the Ebola epidemic severely impacted the provision of healthcare services and caused setbacks in the treatment and control of HIV, tuberculosis, measles, and malaria in these countries.

[7]


The epidemic also had a great impact on children.
Nearly 20% of all EVD cases occurred in children under 15 years of age, and an estimated 30,000 children became orphans during this epidemic.
As funding and logistics previously dedicated to child vaccination campaigns were redirected to Ebola response or postponed to avoid public gatherings, routine immunizations decreased by 30%, further putting children at risk of getting vaccine-preventable diseases.

[8]

,


[9]


The epidemic has been estimated to cost a total of $4.3 billion USD.

[10]

Investments in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone dramatically decreased.
Similarly, the countries experienced a substantial loss in private sector growth, decline in agricultural production leading to concerns about food security, and a decrease in cross-border trade as restrictions on movements, goods, and services increased.

[11]

,


[12]

,


[13]


Current Guidance


While the spread of EVD in West Africa has been controlled, additional cases may continue to occur from time to time.
However, because of ongoing surveillance and strengthened response capabilities, the affected countries now have the experience and tools to rapidly identify cases and limit the spread of the disease.

CDC no longer recommends that U.S. residents avoid nonessential travel to Guinea, Liberia, or Sierra Leone.
Although there is believed to be no risk of EVD to travelers in these countries, travelers should, as usual, avoid contact with sick people, dead bodies, or blood and body fluids.



####
document number 2: 
Dengue fever – Mayotte (France): Disease outbreak news, 23 April 2020


Through event-based surveillance performed throughout 2019, WHO became aware of a dengue outbreak in Mayotte, France, since July 2019.
According to the local health authority (Agence Régionale de Santé) of Mayotte, dengue cases were reported since March 2019; however, the epidemic intensified during January 2020 when the number of cases increased significantly.

From the beginning of January 2020 to 17 April 2020, 3533 confirmed cases of dengue fever have been reported on the island, including 16 deaths.
Of the 3533 cases, 339 were hospitalized and 21 cases were managed in intensive care units.
From 23 February 2020 to 21 March 2020, six out of 17 communes in Mayotte had an incidence rate of more than 5%.

The vast majority of the dengue cases in this outbreak have been caused by dengue virus serotype 1 (DENV-1).

In the past, Mayotte has reported four dengue outbreaks, in 1993, 2010 (caused by DENV-3), and in 2013 and 2014 (caused by DENV-2), which were recorded in several communes of the main island of Mayotte and the small island of Petite-Terre.
The current outbreak is the largest outbreak of dengue in Mayotte reported to date.
Prior to this, the largest outbreak was recorded in 2014 with 522 laboratory confirmed cases, of which 494 cases were confirmed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 27 were confirmed by serologic tests.
During the 2014 outbreak, only serotype DENV-2 was identified.

Public health response

Health authorities in Mayotte have implemented the following measures:

Strengthening integrated vector control activities;


Enhancing surveillance to identify cases;


Updating clinical management guidelines, social mobilization and emergency risk communications.



WHO risk assessment

Mayotte Island is part of the Comoros archipelago (Mozambique Channel, southwestern Indian Ocean), which is under French administration.
Since 2019, only circulation of DENV-1 has been established in Mayotte.
However, epidemics caused by other serotypes are currently underway in the Indian Ocean area, making it possible for another serotype to be introduced to Mayotte.
A shift in the predominant DENV serotype may result in more severe secondary dengue virus infections and severe dengue cases requiring hospitalization and good case management.
A comprehensive risk communication should be developed.

Due to the presence and sufficient density of the competent vectors (Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti), hot and humid climate, and the current rainy season (tropical maritime climate with a hot rainy season from November to May), further upsurge in cases cannot be ruled out.

Responding to the dengue outbreak in Mayotte might be challenging due to the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) situation and overwhelmed health care facilities.
As of 18 April 2020, Mayotte reported 263 confirmed cases of COVID-19.
Furthermore, it is possible that some of the population, might have difficulty accessing the health system.
The population in Mayotte is young but includes vulnerable populations, such as economically disadvantaged people, racial and ethnic minorities, those who are uninsured, and individuals with chronic health conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, who often encounter barriers to accessing healthcare services.

Mayotte only has one hospital and 16 beds in the intensive care unit, and recourse to traditional medicine is also frequent.
Additionally, underreporting of dengue cases cannot be excluded.

WHO advice

There is no specific treatment for dengue.
However, timely detection of cases, identifying any warning signs of severe cases of dengue, and appropriate early case management are key elements of care to prevent deaths due to dengue.
A delay in seeking medical care in severe dengue cases is often related to deaths from dengue virus disease.
Outer islands should refer cases or seek help as early as possible.

Additionally, Integrated Vector Management (IVM) activities should be enhanced to remove potential breeding sites, reduce vector populations, and minimize individual exposure.
This should include both larval and adult vector control strategies (i.e. environmental management and source reduction and chemical control measures).
Vector control measures should be implemented at households, places of work, schools, and healthcare facilities, among others, to prevent vector-person contact.

Given that Aedes mosquitoes, the competent vector, has greater activity during the day, personal protection measures are recommended, such as wearing protective clothing that minimizes skin exposure and using repellents that can be applied to exposed skin or clothes strictly as instructed on the label.
Window and door screens, and mosquito nets (impregnated or not with insecticide) can be useful to reduce vector-person contact in closed spaces during the day or night.

Community supported source reduction measures should be initiated, and vector surveillance and control implemented.
During lockdown situations due to COVID-19, households should be encouraged to work together in and around their homes to remove stagnant water, reduce solid wastes and to ensure proper covering of all water storage containers.
This can be done as a weekly family activity and will help lower the density of mosquitoes.

WHO does not recommend any restrictions on travel or trade to Mayotte on the basis of the information available on this outbreak.



####
document number 3: 
Ebola virus and U.S. preparedness: Research on quarantines, treatments, transmission



The first U.S. case of Ebola was reported on September 25, 2014, when a man who had earlier traveled to Liberia sought help in a Dallas hospital.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formally confirmed the diagnosis three days later.
That patient, Thomas Eric Duncan, eventually died, and two health workers who had contact with him contracted the virus.
While Ebola is contagious only when those affected are experiencing active symptoms, Duncan was sent home after an initial visit to the hospital.
Further, a New York City doctor who recently returned from West Africa has also been infected.

The current outbreak of Ebola in West Africa is the deadliest in the history of the disease, with thousands of infections and deaths in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The two latter countries could see 1.4 million cases by January 2015, according to CDC estimates.
The disease was first identified in 1976, appearing simultaneously in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Until now the number of cases has been fairly limited, but the fatality rates are high — anywhere from 25% to 90%; the average is 50% — depending on the strain of virus and the care received.

The World Health Organization has concluded that both Nigeria and Senegal appear to have stopped the spread of the disease, ending its transmission in those countries.
Many top U.S. health experts say that, despite widespread fear, there remains a very low chance of an epidemic in America.
Based on National Safety Council data, the

Washington Post

calculated that the lifetime odds of dying of Ebola in the United States are 1 in 3,934,300 — compared to 1 in 491 for a car crash, 1 in 79 for the flu and 1 in 7 for heart disease.

Quarantines and legal authority

Following policy decisions by New Jersey and New York, there remain deep questions about the efficacy of quarantines in the United States, and related legal and ethical considerations.
The Congressional Research Service has published a brief on legal issues relating to screening and detaining incoming international travelers at airports, and domestic issues of quarantines.
An October 2014 paper from Mark A. Rothstein at the University of Louisville, "From SARS to Ebola: Legal and Ethical Considerations for Modern Quarantine," provides a survey of legal and ethical questions that remain unresolved:

The federal government has the constitutional authority under the Commerce Clause to impose quarantine to prevent the international and interstate spread of infection, and this responsibility has been delegated to the CDC.
Nevertheless, the states maintain primary responsibility for public health, including quarantine.
Many of the state quarantine laws date to the early twentieth century.
The anthrax attack in 2001 provided the impetus for updating these laws to modernize and streamline state public health emergency response.
Although all of the states have updated their laws, at least to some extent, these efforts must be considered works in progress.
Some of the model laws used as templates for modernization have been criticized for failing to include adequate protections for civil liberties and due process.
Virtually all of the laws lack key ancillary measures needed for successful quarantine, such as prohibiting employment discrimination against individuals in quarantine and providing for temporary income replacement so that individuals will not be tempted to violate the quarantine and go to work.

Past surveys of state legal policies also show variations in the scope of available powers.
For more, see the following academic papers from legal scholars: "Pandemic Influenza: Ethics, Law, and the Public’s Health"; and "Public Health Versus Personal Liberty: The Uneasy Case for Individual Detention, Isolation and Quarantine."

Treatments, therapies and new drugs

As a 2014 article in the

Journal of the American Medical Association

(JAMA) points out, Ebola has been around for many years now, but little progress has been made in terms of treatment: "Since 1976 more than 15 Ebola outbreaks have erupted in sub Saharan Africa, yet therapeutic options remain undeveloped.
There are no licensed vaccines or specific antiviral or immune-mediated treatments for ill patients or for post-exposure prophylaxis."
An experimental drug, ZMapp, is under development, but large-scale medical trials and anything resembling wide-scale availability are far in the future — if it’s effective, which is an open question at this point.
Logistical problems and a lack of funding have hampered efforts to deploy experimental drugs and vaccines, as the journal

Nature

notes.

The Broad Institute, jointly run by Harvard and MIT, has reported some progress in getting a fuller understanding of the genomics of the disease and its mutations, as reported in the journal

Science

.

While there is an urgent need to rapidly accelerate the testing of new treatments, doing so has potential downsides as well.
As the University of Pennsylvania’s Dr.
Steven Joffe writes, "efforts to evaluate novel agents risk diverting attention and human and material assets from proven therapeutic and public health measures.
Well-motivated initiatives directed at promising new therapies must not jeopardize existing health infrastructures."

In an October 2014 article published

The New England Journal of Medicine

, leading researchers note:

Even if adequate safety and immunogenicity are demonstrated in the phase 1 studies, vaccines will not be available in substantial quantity until the first quarter of 2015 at the earliest.
For that to occur, funding must be secured for production.
Even if an effective vaccine can be produced, it is not likely to be 100% effective, so to succeed in stemming the current outbreak, a coordinated effort to improve capacity and provide clinical care in affected countries needs to be scaled up urgently.

An October 2014 letter published in

The Lancet

suggests that one promising research avenue is to investigate those who appear to have an immunity to Ebola, as "many Ebola infections are asymptomatic."
The article notes that "although asymptomatic infections are unlikely to be infectious, they might confer protective immunity and thus have important epidemiological consequences."

Finally, the lack of an effective drug to treat Ebola has also become a political issue.
"NIH has been working on Ebola vaccines since 2001.
It’s not like we suddenly woke up and thought, ‘Oh my gosh, we should have something ready here,'" Dr.
Francis Collins, the head of the National Institutes of Health, has said.
"Frankly, if we had not gone through our 10-year slide in research support, we probably would have had a vaccine in time for this that would’ve gone through clinical trials and would have been ready."

Potential for a large-scale outbreak

While Ebola virus is extremely dangerous, its transmission rate is lower than that of many other diseases.
"As long as people are under proper care and appropriate precautions are taken, there’s no reason to think we can’t control the transmission of the virus," Harvard’s Michael VanRooyen has said.
"So in that sense, it’s not like SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome] or MERS [Middle East respiratory syndrome], for example, where we would worry about an epidemic spreading in the United States."

In terms of the global spread of the disease, an October 2014 study published in

The Lancet

notes: "Based on epidemic conditions and international flight restrictions to and from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone as of Sept 1, 2014 (reductions in passenger seats by 51% for Liberia, 66% for Guinea, and 85% for Sierra Leone), our model projects 2·8 travellers infected with Ebola virus departing the above three countries via commercial flights, on average, every month."

Contagiousness is measured by the average number of people whom a sick person will infect.
This is strongly influenced by the specifics of each illness — when a person becomes infectious themselves after catching the disease, and how the disease can be transmitted.
The transmission rate is called the disease reproduction factor and is referred to as "R0" or "R nought."

One of the most infectious diseases is measles: In an unvaccinated population, a sick person will infect 18 others on average.
(Because the vast majority of the U.S. population is vaccinated against measles, in practice its reproduction rate is effectively zero.)
By comparison, the reproduction rate for mumps is 10, and that for SARS is 4.
HIV is also 4, while Hepatitis C’s rate is approximately 2.

A September 2014 study in

PLoS Current Outbreaks

, "Assessing the International Spreading Risk Associated with the 2014 West African Ebola Outbreak," indicates that the reproduction rate for Ebola is between 1.5 and 2.
Two factors are at play: First, sick people become infectious themselves only when they begin to show symptoms.
Second, direct contact is required for the disease to be transmitted.
Still, because there is no vaccine against Ebola, extreme caution is warranted, and missteps by the Dallas Hospital have increased the chance that others may have been infected.

The study also models the international spreading of the outbreak — the case in Dallas was the first outside Africa — and estimates the probability of Ebola virus appearing in countries around the world.
The results indicate that in the short term, the probability of international spread is "small but not negligible," and could increase if the disease continues to advance in Africa.
Countries outside Africa with the highest probability of outbreaks include the United Kingdom, Belgium and France, in part because of significant air-traffic flows.

Science and the airborne transmission hypothesis

One of the most controversial issues implicated in the current outbreak is the issue of whether Ebola can be transmitted through the air.
Scientists do not believe it can, based on the most recent lab experiments.
The CDC summarizes the findings of several studies as follows: "Airborne transmission of Ebola virus has been hypothesized but not demonstrated in humans.
While Ebola virus can be spread through airborne particles under experimental conditions in animals, this type of spread has not been documented during human EVD outbreaks in settings such as hospitals or households."

In terms of citations for this claim, a 2014

Nature

study performed a careful test involving primates in a lab setting and did not find evidence of airborne transmission.
That is the best and most recent evidence.
The CDC does note two 1995 studies and a 2011 study that drew different, though not necessarily contradictory, conclusions.
An October 2014 letter in

The Lancet

presents what is known about the need for respiratory protection.

U.S. preparedness and concerns

The United States has been planning and practicing for pandemics since the 1970s, and experts note that the "pillars" of this public health work remain basically the same: surveillance; vaccination and medical countermeasures; emergency response coordination; and communications.

For U.S. facilities to prepare for Ebola, there will need to be a variety of unique systems and protocols put into place, health experts note.
A 2014 article in the

Annals of Internal Medicine

spells out four crucial steps: "First, staff education is vital to ‘demystifying’ Ebola and reducing anxiety; second, posters clarifying PPE [personal protective equipment] donning and doffing procedures facilitate staff understanding and compliance; and third, an ongoing, coordinated multidisciplinary effort is required to establish standard operating procedures and staff must be trained to follow them; and finally, direct observation of clinical care enforces adherence to these procedures."
However, all new systems, equipment and public health protocols carry with them the possibility of introducing new risks.
Top experts on health procedures and systems say that an Ebola epidemic is preventable in the United States if strict protocols are followed.

In recent years, the CDC has warned about gaps in epidemiology capacity in state health departments; other academic survey-based research has also furnished warnings about decreased capacity.
Recent crises have seen relatively successful outcomes, but they have been by no means without cost, as noted in a 2013 study in the journal

Emerging Infectious Diseases

:

Although the 2009 A(H1N1)pdm09 pandemic spread globally within a matter of weeks, a 1918-like pandemic did not materialize.
Nonetheless, this most recent pandemic resulted in [approximately] 12,500 deaths in the United States, [approximately] 90% of which occurred in persons [younger than] 65 years of age.
In the wake of this pandemic, the challenge in preparedness is to sustain the interest of private and public sectors in planning for a large-scale outbreak that may have a much more severe effect at a time that cannot be predicted.

A 2014 paper in the

New England Journal of Medicine

, "Pandemic Preparedness and Response: Lessons from the H1N1 Influenza of 2009," offers deep analysis on what research and experience have revealed, and how that might influence future disease outbreaks.
The author, Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg of the Institute of Medicine, notes recent "operational missteps" by the World Health Organization, and "in light of these structural impediments and operational deficiencies, the world was very fortunate that the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic was not more severe."

Further resources: Also see the Congressional Research Service report "Ebola: Basics about the Disease."
Other vital sources of research-based information on the virus are

The Lancet

’s Ebola Research Centre, the Ebola Communication Network (USAID and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health) and the World Health Organization.

Keywords: infectious diseases, pandemics, disease outbreaks, Ebola, influenza, quarantines



####
document number 4: 
Case study: India’s leadership in the fight against Japanese encephalitis



Summary: India has been, and can continue to be, a model for how countries introduce the Japanese encephalitis vaccine.
The World Health Organization now recommends the strategy that India employed: first conducting catch-up campaigns in high-burden districts before transitioning to routine immunization.


In 2005, a massive outbreak of Japanese encephalitis (JE) occurred in the Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Thousands of people fell ill, and more than 1,500 died.

When the outbreak hit, authorities in India recognized that ongoing mosquito control measures, such as spraying insecticides, were not stopping the virus.
They needed an affordable, safe, effective, and long-term solution.

They needed a vaccine.

The outbreak prompted officials to intensify efforts and implement a national strategy for JE control through immunization.
Over the next 10 years and beyond, the government of India (GoI) successfully implemented a sustainable and effective JE vaccination program—first, by vaccinating India’s children at highest risk and then by expanding routine JE vaccination in hundreds of endemic districts across the country.
Thanks to India’s leadership, other countries in Asia have a strong example of how to tackle this once-neglected disease.

Here’s how India fought back and, along the way, paved the way for other countries to tackle JE.

Learn more

By the time of the 2005 outbreak, JE was already a known threat.
Because of India’s increasing irrigation of rice fields that act as a breeding ground for JE-infected mosquitoes, this risk was likely increasing.
India’s first clinically confirmed JE case was in 1955, with outbreaks occurring regularly in several high-risk areas across the country.
The first major epidemic was reported in 1973, followed by another outbreak in 1976.
Noticing the threat of JE, the National Vector Borne Disease Control Program (NVBDCP) began monitoring JE incidence nationwide in 1978.
Over the next 40 years, cases of JE were regularly reported in 26 states and territories, and outbreaks occurred in 15 states.

In an effort to address JE, the government introduced vector control measures, such as insecticide spraying, in the 1970s.
These measures, however, had little impact on the burden of disease.

PATH’s initial work on JE immunization in India began in 2000 in Andhra Pradesh.
PATH was working in partnership with the government of Andhra Pradesh to strengthen routine immunization services and introduce hepatitis B vaccines.
Conversations with district- and state-level health officers, however, revealed growing concern about JE.
Investigation of encephalitis outbreaks and improved disease surveillance and diagnostics suggested a previously unrecognized high incidence of JE, prompting the government of Andhra Pradesh to act quickly.
With technical assistance from PATH, Andhra Pradesh successfully introduced a mouse brain-derived JE vaccine in 2001.
In the first year of vaccination, observed JE cases reduced by 90 percent.

This experience was shared across India and prompted Indian government ministries, the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, and PATH to establish a cross-sectoral India JE working group to coordinate technical support and information-sharing.
The working group developed a roadmap for planning JE vaccination programs.
Repeated outbreaks, combined with national awareness-raising advocacy campaigns, drove the governments of various Indian states to raise their voices and demand solutions for JE control.

The GoI heard these requests.
After the deadly JE outbreak in 2005, the GoI decided to incorporate lessons learned in Andhra Pradesh to initiate a large-scale, unprecedented emergency vaccination campaign in all of India’s JE-endemic states to protect children from future outbreaks.

Just one obstacle stood in the way: they needed a different vaccine.

While an Indian-produced, mouse brain-derived vaccine was used to immunize children in Andhra Pradesh and other areas, the available supply fell far short of the volume needed to reach children across the entire country.
Around 100 million children in India would need to be vaccinated, and the manufacturer of the existing mouse brain-derived vaccine could only produce less than half a million doses per year.
The vaccine also had a complicated dosing schedule and was very expensive—both challenging obstacles to vaccination programs.

Another vaccine produced in China, now known as CD-JEV, offered a potential solution to India’s challenges.
CD-JEV was safe, effective, and affordable and required only one dose to achieve immunity.
PATH spearheaded negotiations with the vaccine’s manufacturer, the Chengdu Institute of Biological Products, to establish a price that was affordable for low-resource JE-endemic countries.
Based on recommendations from technical experts and existing evidence on the vaccine’s safety and efficacy from China and Nepal, the first country outside of China to use the vaccine, India self-financed and imported CD-JEV for the vaccination campaign.

With a safe, available, and affordable vaccine in hand, the GoI launched a large-scale, five-year JE vaccination campaign in 2006.
It was India’s most ambitious immunization program to date.
In just the first year, the campaigns targeted children and adolescents in 11 high-risk districts of four states and reached more than 9 million children.
Vaccines were administered to 88 percent of the target population.
Over the course of the five-year campaign from 2006 to 2011, nearly 78 million children in 109 districts of 15 states were immunized against JE.

Following the success of the five-year campaign, the government of India knew it needed to scale JE vaccination to additional JE-endemic districts and transition from campaigns to sustained routine immunization.
New districts and states were reporting JE cases, and low routine immunization coverage rates left room for improvement.
Using surveillance data to prioritize higher-risk areas, JE vaccination gradually expanded from the initial 11 districts in 4 states to 269 districts in 21 states between 2011 and 2018.
The GoI has targeted 669 districts—almost all of India—for eventual scale-up.

PATH continued to support India’s JE control efforts in the transition to routine JE vaccination.
From 2013 to 2015, the governments of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar asked PATH for assistance with scaling up and improving coverage of their JE routine immunization programs, as well as improving clinical management of encephalitis cases to reduce mortality.
At the national level, PATH helped strengthen India’s nationwide encephalitis surveillance efforts and helped conduct vaccine impact assessments.

As PATH’s 15-year JE project comes to a close, the efforts of Indian officials to combat JE have continued to grow.
As of mid-2018, coverage of routine JE immunization in the districts with the vaccine is estimated at 65 percent.
Since 2006, roughly 156 million Indian children have been vaccinated against JE, and India continues to self-fund the vaccination program using the affordable CD-JEV vaccine.
An additional 38 districts are planning to conduct JE vaccination campaigns in 2018 and 2019.

Lessons learned in India informed other endemic countries’ experiences as they considered JE vaccine introduction.
Because India was only the second country outside China to use the CD-JEV vaccine, data on its use and evaluation in India reinforced earlier data on the vaccine’s safety and effectiveness and contributed to the WHO prequalification of CD-JEV in 2013.

India’s experience also helped inform WHO recommendations on JE vaccine introduction strategies in other countries.
India’s strategy of conducting catch-up campaigns in high-burden, high-priority districts first, followed by routine JE immunization, was recommended by WHO and has been mirrored by several other countries.



Perhaps most importantly, India set an example for the region.
From the beginning, the driving force behind India’s efforts against JE has been the desire of local, state, and national officials to sustainably protect children from a dangerous disease.
Building on a strong foundation of both local and global evidence, input from partners, and ever-adjusting strategies informed by experience, India is making significant progress in reducing the burden of JE.

Other countries can do—and are now doing—the same.



####
document number 5: 
A Timeline of Outbreaks from 2000 to Present


Illustration by Joelena Despard


All information is reported under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization.

1999-2002 – West Nile Virus

The first account of the West Nile Virus in the U.S. was in New York City in the summer of 1999.
The virus was transmitted by mosquito bites, concentrating in areas with warmer temperatures\; as the number of human cases grew, so did the number of bird deaths.
During a three-year period, WNV spread to 44 states, amounting to 4,156 cases and 284 deaths.
Typical symptoms include breaking out in high fever, a stiff neck and headaches, though most people who are infected do not show any symptoms unless the infection is serious.

2001 – Anthrax

After 9/11, letters contaminated with white powder containing anthrax spores were delivered to a news media company and two U.S. Senators’ offices.
The powder let the anthrax spores float in the air to be breathed in.
The first diagnosed case came in October of 2001, and climbed to a total of 22 cases and five deaths.
The FBI led a nine-year investigation on how anthrax got in those letters, and concluded the powder came from a research lab.

2003 – SARS-CoV

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, a viral respiratory illness caused by a coronavirus, was first diagnosed in Asia in February of 2003, later reaching the U.S. in that same year.
Common symptoms included high fevers, coughing and shortness of breath.
A total of 8,098 people worldwide became sick, with only eight of those cases being in the U.S., and 774 people died.

2006 – Mumps

The U.S. saw multi-state outbreaks of mumps reporting more than 6,500 cases in 2006, concentrating mainly in Midwestern college campuses.
Mumps spread through close-contact activities such as sports, dancing, kissing, etc.
From 2009 to 2010, the largest outbreak reported 3,000 cases in a close-knit religious community in New York City after an infected student returned from the UK where there was another outbreak.
Notable symptoms include fever, puffy cheeks and a swollen, tender jaw.

2006 – E. coli Salmonella

Escherichia coli was first reported in the U.S. in 2006 through the contamination of fresh spinach, with 199 reported cases and three deaths within 26 states.
The following year, Taco Bell was linked to E. coli cases in the northeastern area of the U.S.
The contraction of E. coli can lead to the development of Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome and potentially kidney failure, while other notable symptoms are severe diarrhea and respiratory illnesses.
In 2008, 49 cases in multiple states were linked to consuming Kroger Beef and in 2009 raw cookie dough was the culprit.
However, the most infamous outbreak occurred in 2015 where a total of 58 cases were reported in 14 states.

In 2006, tomatoes were linked to Salmonella for a total of 183 cases in 21 states.
The list of foods linked to salmonella ranged from cantaloupe, peanut butter, raw chicken to even pet food.
In 2012, cases of Salmonella linked to small turtles led to a total of 473 cases in 43 states but no deaths reported.
The most recent outbreaks have been reported from consumption of a specific brand of tahini in 2018.
Common symptoms include diarrhea, fever and abdominal cramps.

2009 – H1N1 Virus (Swine Flu)

In April of 2009, 20 cases of swine flu were reported in the U.S., eventually becoming a pandemic flu reaching 208 countries by December and resulting in at least 12,220 deaths.
The swine flu was transmitted by pigs as a respiratory disease, usually through contact with farm raisers or participation in fairs.

2012 – Whooping Cough

Also known as pertussis, this respiratory disease surmounted to 48,277 cases in the U.S. in 2012.
Coughing fits last up to 10 weeks or more and can be life-threatening for infants.
Worldwide, the estimation of whooping cough cases is 24.1 million with about 160,700 deaths per year according to the National Center for Biotechnology Information.

2012 – MERS-CoV

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome was first found in the Arabian Peninsula in 2012 and was also associated with the coronavirus once the illness became viral.
Only two cases were found in the U.S. in 2014, one in Indiana and another in Florida, linked to health care providers who previously worked in Saudi Arabia.
Up until 2019, 2,494 cases have been reported, including 858 deaths.

2014 – Ebola

Ebola was found in Africa near the Ebola River in 1976, but the outbreak that recently caught the world’s attention started in Guinea before spreading to neighboring countries, with the highest cases in Sierra Leone of 14,124 and 3,956 deaths.
Ebola reached the U.S. but only recorded four cases and one fatality, and in 2015 the CDC announced a vaccine against the disease.
The most recent outbreaks of Ebola occured in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2018.

2016 – Zika Virus

The most at threat potential victims for this mosquito-transmitted disease are pregnant women, whom if bitten, their pregnancy could result in stillbirth, preterm birth or fetal loss.
In November of 2016, 84 countries were reported to have Zika virus cases in the Americas, with the first cases reported in Brazil, then spreading in high numbers to New York, Florida and Texas.

2020 – Coronavirus

On Jan.
30, the World Health Organization declared a "public health emergency of international concern" for the new coronavirus, COVID-19, originating from Wuhan, Hubei Province in China.
Like SARS and MERS, this virus originates from certain animals before infecting humans, and has spread quickly.
The confirmed locations of the virus’ presence are in Asia, the U.S., Canada, Australia, Europe and Russia.



####
document number 6: 
US government shuts down military lab studying Ebola and plague over fears deadly bugs are escaping via wastewater


The US government has shut down all research at the nation's top biological warfare lab amid fears deadly microbes could leak into the water supply.

Scientists at Fort Detrick, Maryland, study Ebola, the plague (caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis) and rabbit fever (caused by the bacterium tularemia).

But last month US health officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sent a cease-and-desist order citing concerns that the lab does not have 'sufficient systems in place to decontaminate wastewater.'

Caree Vander Linden, spokesperson for the center, said research is 'on hold' and may be suspended for months.

It comes just weeks after uproar over a new book on Lyme disease, Bitten, which suggested the tick-borne illness, now plaguing the US, was unwittingly unleashed on Americans by biological warfare researchers at Fort Detrick decades ago.


The cease-and-desist notice automatically terminated the center's registration with the Federal Select Agent Program, which grants special permission for the study and possession disease-causing materials.

In order to get re-approved, the center will have to improve its decontamination processes.

Regulators also took issue with the lack of periodic re-training of staff who are handling the dangerous bacteria.

According to the local paper, the Frederick News Post, which first reported the cease-and-desist notice, Fort Detrick has been struggling to improve its decontamination processes since a flooding issue in May last year.

Fort Detrick was one of just a few places in the US approved to study Ebola amid the fresh outbreak in sub-Saharan Africa.

Ebola, Yersinia pestis and tularemia are all classed as Tier 1 Agents, meaning they pose a severe threat to the public.

Yersinia pestis, more commonly known as the plague, was the cause of some of the world's deadliest pandemics, including the Justinian Plague, the Black Death, and the major epidemics that swept through China in the late 1800s.

The disease continues to affect populations around the world today.

Tularemia is a rare infectious disease that can infect animals and people, and can be transmitted by ticks.
Rates of infection are on the rise, as with all tick-borne illnesses.



####
document number 7: 
Pinellas nursing home evacuated after outbreak; 3 dead from coronavirus



SEMINOLE — Three nursing home residents have died of the coronavirus in an outbreak that has afflicted Freedom Square of Seminole, a sprawling retirement community that has seen dozens hospitalized because of the virus, officials said.

A 74-year-old man died April 10.
Then an 84-year-old woman and a 66-year-old man both died Friday, according to medical examiner records.

Hours after Friday’s deaths, ambulances started lining up outside the Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation nursing home.

State, local and company officials agreed to shut down the facility and evacuate the 39 remaining residents to local hospitals, according to the Pinellas County administrator’s office.

What happened in this nursing home reveals how quickly COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, can spread in a facility filled with those most vulnerable to it.
In a span of eight days, from the first confirmed diagnoses to Friday’s mass evacuation, a total of 95 residents were removed from the facility and three have now died.

But the outbreak didn’t become public until Wednesday, after the first death and first wave of evacuations.
The pandemic has hit senior care centers across the country particularly hard.
But in Florida, Gov.
Ron DeSantis has refused to disclose which of those facilities have confirmed cases of COVID-19.

"We extend our sincere condolences to the families and patients ... and our thoughts and prayers are with them at this difficult time," Freedom Square Executive director Michael Mason said in a statement sent Friday to the

Tampa Bay Times. "

Over this past week Freedom Square began an orderly and voluntary transfer of Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation patients who were asymptomatic but potentially exposed, symptomatic, or who had confirmed cases of COVID-19 to three local hospitals for treatment and monitoring."

Inside the nursing home, nurses told the

Times

they didn’t know how quickly the virus had spread inside the facility — but they knew the company wasn’t ready for it.

• • •

Freedom Square of Seminole is a retirement community of more than 700 residents at 7800 Liberty Lane.
The Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation nursing home is one of several buildings on its campus.

A nurse who has worked in all of the buildings there said the company has not been forthcoming in sharing information with employees, patients and their relatives.

Employees did not know about the gravity of the outbreak until the media reported the transfer of patients late Wednesday, said the nurse, who requested anonymity out of fear of job loss.

"They kept information from the patients and families," the nurse said.
"They have not told us anything about this until it blew up."

Freedom Square, the nurse said, has lacked masks and gowns for weeks and many nurses and certified nursing assistants have resorted to buying their own equipment — if they can find it.
Some employees are also wearing homemade or cloth masks because the company is not supplying N95 masks, the nurse said.

"You have to go to Walgreens," the nurse said.

As the outbreak has grown, the nurse said employees fear for their safety because protocols are not in place to minimize the virus spread such as disinfecting many common areas.

Then on Thursday, the company told employees they need to get tested for the virus.
Many have concerns about the spread because employees enter different parts of the buildings on the campus, the nurse said.

"People don’t feel safe," the worker said.
"Nurses are quitting."

Patient care has deteriorated as employees quit and supplies shrink, the worker said.

This account was relayed to Freedom Square’s parent company, Life Care Services of Iowa, which operates more than 130 properties, according to the website.

The company did not address the allegations in a statement to the

Times

.

• • •

The first confirmed case of a resident was a man hospitalized on April 5, according to the medical examiner.
He tested positive on April 9 for COVID-19.
He died on April 10.

Then on Tuesday, Freedom Square officials said they transferred 38 nursing home patients to three local hospitals.
Some were confirmed to have COVID-19, officials said, while others had symptoms or had come into contact with patients who displayed symptoms.

The outbreak didn’t become public until county officials revealed it Wednesday.
Freedom Square confirmed the hospitalizations on Thursday.
And information about the three deaths was not known until Friday, a week after the first death, when the

Times

obtained the medical examiner’s reports.

Freedom Square said on Thursday that 21 residents and six staffers had tested positive.
Mason sent a note to residents, their families and employees announcing that "in an abundance of caution," COVID-19 patients would be given "non-emergency transport" to local hospitals.

"This is not only good news for these residents, but it is also good news for the entire Freedom Square campus," he wrote in a letter obtained by the

Times

.

Pinellas County Commissioner Pat Gerard said she was told the facility was reluctant to transfer the patients to hospitals, but did so when they became overwhelmed by the outbreak.
In its statement, the retirement community said it transferred the patients to stop the spread of the virus and to focus on the remaining patients still living in the building.

Then came Friday’s evacuation.

"This will allow the facility and (Department of Health) to completely reset the facility’s infection control practices, decontaminate the site, provide additional training for staff, etc.," said a message the county administrator’s office sent to the Pinellas County Commission.

"On the advice of our partners, and out of an abundance of caution, at noon on Friday ... Freedom Square made the decision to transfer all remaining patients from Seminole Pavilion to local hospitals," Mason said in a statement to the

Times

.
"The families of all impacted residents have been contacted to let them know of the change in their loved one’s situation."

That afternoon, four ambulances started pulling up to the nursing home, each one taking a resident to a local hospital.
The ambulances returned to pick up more patients, and on it went through the evening.

A total of 95 patients have been transferred out of the nursing home, Mason said, and all were tested for the virus.
There have been 36 confirmed cases and six patients are awaiting the results of their tests.
There were 53 residents who tested negative.

The residents who tested positive, or showed symptoms, were taken to local hospitals.

But Mason’s statement did not address how many staffers were tested, and how many of those tests came back positive.

• • •

The first resident to die was Thomas Minichillo.
He was 74.

He arrived at Largo Medical Center on April 5 for a "mental status change," according to the medical examiner’s report.

At the time, he did not have flu-like symptoms.
Two days later, he was hypoxic — deprived of oxygen — and was intubated.
Doctors ordered a COVID-19 test.
On April 9, he tested positive.
He died, still intubated, at 2:27 p.m. on April 10.

Jean Israelson, 84, died Friday after a week of experiencing symptoms, according to a medical examiner’s report.

She was tested for COVID-19 on April 11.
She was experiencing shortness of breath and was transported to Largo Medical Center on Tuesday.
A laboratory confirmed Israelson had contracted COVID-19 before she died.

Daniel Lewis, 66, died Friday morning, a few hours after Israelson, according to a medical examiner’s report.

Lewis was taken Sunday from the nursing home to St.
Anthony’s Hospital, where medical staff confirmed he had COVID-19.
He was transferred to the Suncoast Hospice North Pinellas Care Center Wednesday.
He was pronounced dead at 9:30 a.m. Friday.

Lewis was admitted to the hospital in mid-February with chest pain, difficulty breathing and a history of serious lung disease, but records indicate that as many as eight weeks passed before he was tested for COVID-19.

His daughter, Melissa, told the medical investigator that her father lived in his own home until mid-February, when he was admitted to St.
Anthony’s, according to the report.
Daniel Lewis, a heavy smoker with a history of severe lung disease, was suffering from chest pain and difficulty breathing.

He was diagnosed with a mycobacterium infection, treated, and transferred to Carrington Place.
But he was admitted back to St.
Anthony’s 12 hours later with worsening symptoms.
Lewis was moved to Freedom Square for rehab on March 26.

He was tested at the nursing home for COVID-19 on April 10.
Two days later, his results came back positive.
He died five days after the positive test.

• • •

Family members, attorneys and advocates have sounded alarms about the delays in residents and the public being informed about the outbreak.

April Hill, an elder law attorney with Hill Law Group in St.
Petersburg, said one of her clients hadn’t heard anything until reports of the coronavirus outbreak hit the news.
When the news became public, they got a generic phone call saying there were a few positive cases.

The client’s family member is in independent living at Freedom Square, which is housed in a separate building from the rehab center, Hill said.

She said her client felt like they were being left in the dark.

"They’re not feeling like Freedom Square is being open or honest with them," Hill said.

Beth Woods of Chicago said her family is worried about her father, a Freedom Square resident who tested positive for COVID-19 and was transferred to a local hospital.

The family, Woods said, has not been able to get much information from Freedom Square.

She said they got several calls from staff on Thursday but "an employee couldn’t give me any specific information about my father or when he was tested or what he knew about his condition."

"We still haven’t spoken with my father," Woods said, "and not a single word from Freedom Square today."

She praised the care and communication from the staff at Morton Plant Hospital.
Woods said her family is learning more from the media than Freedom Square.

"Whatever they’re doing there is a complete cover up," Woods told the

Times

about Freedom Square.
"What’s happening now is not humane."

HAVE YOU LOST SOMEONE YOU LOVE TO COVID-19?
: Help us remember them

CONTRIBUTE TO THE SCRAPBOOK: Help us tell the story of life under coronavirus

BRIGHT SPOTS IN DARK TIMES: The world is hard right now, but there’s still good news out there

LISTEN TO THE CORONAVIRUS PODCAST: New episodes every week, including interviews with experts and reporters

GET THE DAYSTARTER MORNING UPDATE: Sign up to receive the most up-to-date information, six days a week

We’re working hard to bring you the latest news on the coronavirus in Florida.
This effort takes a lot of resources to gather and update.
If you haven’t already subscribed,


please consider buying a print or digital subscription.



####
document number 8: 
DR Congo medics arrested over death of Ebola doctor



Colleagues say Dr Richard Mouzoko was passionate and committed


Three Congolese doctors have been arrested in the Democratic Republic of Congo over the killing of a World Health Organization (WHO) medic, a military prosecutor has said.

Cameroonian doctor Richard Mouzoko was shot dead in April at a hospital in Butembo, where he was treating Ebola patients.

The "passionate" medic was "always ready to go where people would need his help most," the WHO said in a tribute.

The motive for the attack is unclear.

More than 1,800 people have died from the Ebola virus in the past year.
Efforts to contain the spread have been hindered by militia group violence and by suspicion towards foreign medical assistance.

Senior military prosecutor Lt Col Jean-Baptiste Kumbu told AFP that militiamen involved in attacking treatment centres, including Butembo hospital, had under interrogation implicated four doctors in planning the raids.

He said the three Congolese doctors will be prosecuted for "terrorism" and "criminal conspiracy", according to AFP, while the fourth doctor was still at large.


Get the latest on this and other stories on BBC Africa Live


The impact of militant attacks in DR Congo


Ebola disbelief widespread in Congo hotspots


Ebola outbreak in five graphics



The current outbreak in eastern DR Congo began in August last year and is the biggest of the 10 to hit the country since 1976, when the virus was first discovered.

It is dwarfed by the West African epidemic of 2014-16, which affected 28,616 people mainly in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
About 11,310 people died in what was the largest outbreak of the virus ever recorded.


Media captionFear and myths: Why people are still in denial about Ebola


Dr Mouzoko was one of a number of medics deployed by the WHO to help fight the spread of the virus in DR Congo.

Former colleagues in Madagascar, Cameroon and DR Congo have described Dr Mouzoko as a committed professional, who over the course of his career, helped train hundreds of young doctors and health workers.

"He would regularly spend 15 to 20 days a month working among isolated communities in his home country, Cameroon, far from his wife and 4 children," the WHO said in a statement after Dr Mouzoko's death.

His funeral in April was attended by the global health body's top official and its Africa director.

Report



In a letter to the mayor of Butembo, a group representing local doctors said it was "indignant" over the arrests, adding that their absence would cripple vital medical services in the area such as blood transfusions and disease prevention.

The group has threatened to strike within 48 hours unless the three detained doctors are released.

But the military prosecutor dismissed their demands as "out of the question", AFP reports.

Why are Ebola workers being attacked?


About 200 health facilities have been attacked in DR Congo this year, forcing health workers to suspend or delay vaccinations and treatments.

Reuters quotes Lt Col Kumbu as saying a total of 54 people are currently under arrest in connection with attacks on Ebola treatment centres.

In February, medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) put its activities on hold in Butembo and Katwa - two eastern cities in the outbreak's epicentre.

In North Kivu, community-based militia groups called Mai-Mai have been behind some of the attacks against health centres and workers.

Another militia group, the Allied Defence Forces (Ugandan rebels operating within DR Congo) have also been accused of causing widespread disruption to medical units.

There have also been a series of attacks by other unidentified groups on Ebola response centres.


Media captionSome simple techniques can help prevent spread of Ebola.


In one incident, family members assaulted health workers who were overseeing the burial of their relative in May.

A 2018 study published in the Lancet medical journal says "belief in misinformation was widespread" concerning the Ebola outbreak in North Kivu.

One in four respondents believed in the statement that Ebola does not exist, with an even higher proportion saying the Ebola outbreak was fabricated for financial gain, or to destabilise the region.

"There's already been civil unrest in the region and that's exacerbated when a foreign response comes into an area that's heavily guarded," says Lara Salahi, an author who has written about responses to Ebola outbreaks.



####
document number 9: 
95,000 stranded at sea: What happens when a cruise ship becomes a hot zone


The last place anyone wants to be during the coronavirus pandemic is stranded aboard a cruise ship, where disease can spread with lightning speed.

This week, the last 3,500 or so passengers aboard three cruise ships stuck at sea will be coming into port at last.
The

Pacific Princess

and the

MSC Magnifica,

are scheduled to berth today in California and France with 1,880 passengers, who will be transferred into home isolation.
The

Costa Deliziosa

had to evacuate one passenger with health issues last week at the port in Marsala, Italy.
The ship’s nearly 2,000 passengers were reportedly quarantined until a coronavirus test came back negative, and the ship is said to be disembarking most of them in Barcelona today before returning to Genoa, Italy with its remaining 453 Italian citizens.
There are still 124 additional ships in U.S. waters with 95,000 crew members of varying nationalities on board with no clear timeline for when and how they will all return to their home countries, some of which have closed their borders.

(

Related: How hard will the coronavirus hit the travel industry?

)

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.



Left:

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.

Right:

Members of the U.S. Coast Guard load personal protective equipment into a

… Read More

Photograph by Gabrielle Lurie, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Petty Officer 3rd Class Taylor Bacon, U.S. Coast Guard District 11, AP (Right)

Since the March 14 no-sail order issued by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the agency has helped bring more than 12,000 citizens and foreign nationals into home isolation.
At least 17 cruises have had passengers testing positive for COVID-19.
"We’ve even had people coming back positive from Nile River cruises," says Cindy Friedman, a medical epidemiologist who leads the CDC’s cruise ship team.

Even when quarantined inside their cabin, passengers are not necessarily shielded from infection, says Joacim Rocklöv , an epidemiologist at Umeå University in Sweden.
Rocklöv estimates that a single person on board the

Diamond Princess

cruise ship in January infected 15 others, a rate four times higher than observed in Wuhan, China, where the new coronavirus virus first emerged.
Rocklöv suggests this could’ve been partly due to a "super spreader" event, such as a social engagement on-board where the first infected passenger or passengers mingled with uninfected ones.

Passengers began to disembark from the Grand Princess cruise ship at the Port of Oakland in Oakland, California on March 10.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


(

Related: Here’s how to fight germs wherever you go.

)

The virus is primarily transmitted through small respiratory droplets, which can spread on surfaces, through close contact, and, possibly, the ship’s ventilation system.
Crew members packed up to eight to a room and delivering food to passengers can also expedite its spread.
The disease has been particularly insidious because as many as a quarter of people who get it may not show symptoms, and infected individuals can spread the virus to others before they show symptoms.
Because cruise ship passengers tend to be older than the overall U.S. population, they are also most susceptible to becoming critically ill or dying.

Michael Callahan , a medical doctor and infectious disease expert at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, participated in medical evacuations of the

Diamond Princess

and

Grand Princess

cruise ships.
He says that if it were up to him, cruises around the world should have been immediately evacuated and passengers and crews quarantined inside hotels for 14 days.
"You’ve got to break the chain of infection," he says.

Diamond Princess

evacuation


The true scale of the threat of COVID-19 first became clear with the outbreak aboard the

Diamond Princess

.
The infection is thought to have been brought on board by an 80-year old Chinese man who had disembarked by the time his positive test came back on February 1.
Even after guests were sequestered in their cabins and the ship docked in Yokohama, Japan, the disease continued to spread among the 2,666 passengers and 1,045 crew.
The first 10 cases were confirmed on February 5.
Japanese authorities removed sick passengers one by one and treated them at a local hospital, but passengers were otherwise confined on board.



Left:

Members of the Filipino Community Center protest perceived lack of health protections for Filipino Grand Princess workers as the ship stopped in San Francisco to restock supplies before sailing back to sea.

… Read More

Photograph by Liz Hafalia, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Tim Rue, Bloomberg, Getty Images (Right)

Deluged with emails and phone calls from passengers and family members, the CDC waited a week to authorize a quarantine operation, at which point more than 200 passengers had tested positive along with 20 crew members, including many in food service.
Inconsistent testing and delays in receiving the results, however, meant that many more were likely infected.

The U.S. had never conducted a large-scale mission to evacuate citizens from abroad amid an infectious disease outbreak.
Doing it on a cruise ship?
That was new, too.
"There was no rulebook," says Callahan.

A little-known agency inside the Department of Health and Human Services known as the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response kicked into action.
Officials there cobbled together teams of doctors, nurse practitioners, nurses and pharmacists, and brought in Callahan and another infectious disease expert, both veterans of Ebola hot zones in African nations.

(

Related: Learn how the coronavirus compares to Ebola, flu, and other outbreaks.)


James Lawler , a medical doctor and co-executive director of the Global Center for Health Security at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, got the call on a Tuesday and was on a plane to Japan the next day, having plunked down a $35,000 government grant to buy 21 pressurized bio-containment suits.
"That’s a lot of extra carry-on bags," he says.

Because of the virus’s high fatality rate—as high as one to two percent—the team treated the entire cruise ship as a "hot zone," meaning they had to use the strictest infection control procedures.
A tent set up at the farthest end of the dock was used to remove and decontaminate or dispose of their gear upon stepping off the vessel.

Doctors scrutinized

Diamond Princess’

s manifest to identify American citizens and checked on each one, beginning with passengers most at-risk, including the elderly and those with conditions such as diabetes or mobility issues.
A pharmacist based in the ship’s library maintained radio contact, obtaining appropriate prescription refills from Japanese pharmacies.

Once cleared, 329 Americans wearing masks were then taken by bus to two cargo planes and flown to quarantine on military bases in the United States.
Eleven passengers would end up testing positive by the time they arrived and were flown on to Nebraska.
Three more would fall ill later.
An additional 111 Americans were either hospitalized in Japan or remained there for other reasons.

Overall, the

Diamond Princess

outbreak infected 712 passengers and killed 9.
Had the passengers been isolated and quarantined on February 3, those actions likely would have prevented at least 76 infections, according to an analysis in the

Journal of Travel Medicine

.

A passenger cheers as medical personnel begin to move travelers from the Grand Princess cruise ship onto airplanes at Oakland International Airport.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


"It was absolutely the right move to get Americans off," Lawler says.

The March 8 cruise ship evacuation of the

Grand Princess

, which began 50 miles off the coast of California, proved to be even more harrowing for rescue workers.
Amid rough waters, the medical team had to leap from a small Coast Guard vessel to a lifeboat and on to a ladder dangling from the cruise ship—all while wearing clumsy bio-containment suits.

"A mistake would have resulted in severe injury, or death from drowning or crushing injury between the two vessels," reads a government commendation letter given to Bryan Lovejoy, a nurse practitioner on that mission.

All aboard


In the six weeks since the

Grand Princess

medical evacuation, cruise ship quarantine procedures have changed as COVID-19 has become endemic in U.S. communities and as various states and localities have enacted social distancing measures.

Under CDC oversight, cruise lines are responsible for getting passengers safely into home quarantine through charter flights and buses.
Symptomatic and asymptomatic passengers are separated, while the Coast Guard and ambulances handle those needing medical evacuation.
With a vaccine not expected until next year, it remains unclear when cruises will be safe.
On April 15, the CDC’s no-sail order was extended for 100 days or until the agency rescinds it.
"With this pandemic, it’s really not advised to go on a cruise," says the CDC’s Friedman.

Princess Cruises, Holland America, and Carnival Cruises have canceled all their bookings through the middle of the summer, though reservations are reportedly up for 2021.
In a statement, Cruise Lines International Association said that "cruising is neither the source or cause of the virus or its spread" and that "it would be a false assumption to connect higher frequency and visibility in reporting to a higher frequency of infection."

(

Related: What to do if your vacation has been canceled.

)

Carolyn Wright, a Santa Fe, New Mexico-based photographer who was quarantined on the

Grand Princess

in Oakland in March, says that she and a friend have a reservation for a cruise in Germany this fall.

"I’m certainly not looking forward to the Viking Cruise like I was," she says.
"I don’t know if it’s going to happen."

Brendan Borrell lives in Los Angeles and writes about wild places and wild people.
Follow him on Twitter.



####
document number 10: 
Archived: WHO Timeline - COVID-19


This statement is no longer maintained.
An updated version was published on 29 June 2020.


&amp;amp;nbsp;


31 Dec 2019

Wuhan Municipal Health Commission, China, reported a cluster of cases of pneumonia in Wuhan, Hubei Province.
A novel coronavirus was eventually identified.

1 January 2020

WHO had set up the IMST (Incident Management Support Team) across the three levels of the organization: headquarters, regional headquarters and country level, putting the organization on an emergency footing for dealing with the outbreak.

4 January 2020

WHO reported on social media that there was a cluster of pneumonia cases – with no deaths – in Wuhan, Hubei province.

5 January 2020

WHO published our first Disease Outbreak News on the new virus.
This is a flagship technical publication to the scientific and public health community as well as global media.
It contained a risk assessment and advice, and reported on what China had told the organization about the status of patients and the public health response on the cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan.

10 January 2020

WHO issued a comprehensive package of technical guidance online with advice to all countries on how to detect, test and manage potential cases, based on what was known about the virus at the time.
This guidance was shared with WHO's regional emergency directors to share with WHO representatives in countries.

Based on experience with SARS and MERS and known modes of transmission of respiratory viruses, infection and prevention control guidance were published to protect health workers recommending droplet and contact precautions when caring for patients, and airborne precautions for aerosol generating procedures conducted by health workers.

12 January 2020

China publicly shared the genetic sequence of COVID-19.

13 January 2020

Officials confirm a case of COVID-19 in Thailand, the first recorded case outside of China.

14 January 2020

WHO's technical lead for the response noted in a press briefing there may have been limited human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus (in the 41 confirmed cases), mainly through family members, and that there was a risk of a possible wider outbreak.
The lead also said that human-to-human transmission would not be surprising given our experience with SARS, MERS and other respiratory pathogens.

20-21 January 2020

WHO experts from its China and Western Pacific regional offices conducted a brief field visit to Wuhan.

22 January 2020

WHO mission to China issued a statement saying that there was evidence of human-to-human transmission in Wuhan but more investigation was needed to understand the full extent of transmission.

22- 23 January 2020

The WHO Director- General convened an Emergency Committee (EC) under the International Health Regulations (IHR 2005) to assess whether the outbreak constituted a public health emergency of international concern.
The independent members from around the world could not reach a consensus based on the evidence available at the time.
They asked to be reconvened within 10 days after receiving more information.

28 January 2020

A senior WHO delegation led by the Director-General travelled to Beijing to meet China’s leadership, learn more about China’s response, and to offer any technical assistance.

While in Beijing, Dr. Tedros agreed with Chinese government leaders that an international team of leading scientists would travel to China on a mission to better understand the context, the overall response, and exchange information and experience.

30 January 2020

The WHO Director-General reconvened the Emergency Committee (EC).
This was earlier than the 10-day period and only two days after the first reports of limited human-to-human transmission were reported outside China.
This time, the EC reached consensus and advised the Director-General that the outbreak constituted a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).
The Director-General accepted the recommendation and declared the novel coronavirus outbreak (2019-nCoV) a PHEIC.
This is the 6th time WHO has declared a PHEIC since the International Health Regulations (IHR) came into force in 2005.

WHO’s situation report for 30 January reported 7818 total confirmed cases worldwide, with the majority of these in China, and 82 cases reported in 18 countries outside China.
WHO gave a risk assessment of very high for China, and high at the global level.

3 February 2020

WHO releases the international community's Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan to help protect states with weaker health systems.

11-12 February 2020

WHO convened a Research and Innovation Forum on COVID-19, attended by more than 400 experts and funders from around the world, which included presentations by George Gao, Director General of China CDC, and Zunyou Wu, China CDC's chief epidemiologist.

16-24 February 2020

The WHO-China Joint mission, which included experts from Canada, Germany, Japan, Nigeria, Republic of Korea, Russia, Singapore and the US (CDC, NIH) spent time in Beijing and also travelled to Wuhan and two other cities.
They spoke with health officials, scientists and health workers in health facilities (maintaining physical distancing).
The report of the joint mission can be found here: https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf

11 March 2020

Deeply concerned both by the alarming levels of spread and severity, and by the alarming levels of inaction, WHO made the assessment that COVID-19 can be characterized as a pandemic.

13 March 2020

COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund launched to receive donations from private individuals, corporations and institutions.

18 March 2020

WHO and partners launch the Solidarity Trial, an international clinical trial that aims to generate robust data from around the world to find the most effective treatments for COVID-19.



####
document number 11: 
SARS Pandemic: How the Virus Spread Around the World in 2003


In November 2002, doctors in the Guangdong province of southeastern China began to see the first cases of what would become known as SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Over the next several months, 8,096 people in 26 countries contracted the new viral illness, leading to 774 deaths.
Although the slow reporting of initial SARS cases helped the illness spread, globally-enforced medical practices eventually helped end the outbreak.

The reasons for the slow reporting of SARS are complicated.
Doctors had never seen the viral illness before, and at first, those in Guangdong province thought the SARS cases they were seeing might be atypical pneumonia.

"Nobody was aware of it, including probably people in Beijing," says Arnold S. Monto, a professor of epidemiology and global public health at the University of Michigan.
Even after doctors began to realize that there was something new about the illnesses they were seeing, "it was kept locally for a while, which was one of the problems."

There were also reports that officials may have encouraged doctors not to report new cases when SARS spread to Beijing.
In April 2003,

Time

magazine obtained a letter from Jiang Yanyong, a physician at an army hospital in Beijing, alleging the actual number of SARS cases in the capital city was much higher than the official count.
This turned out to be true, and Chinese officials released the real numbers that month (and also began to monitor Jiang).

SARS Originates in China, Jumps to Hong Kong


People wearing masks to protect against the SARS virus in Hong Kong's Mass Transit Railway on March 31, 2003.
The death toll at the time of this photograph was 13 with 530 people infected.


SARS jumped from mainland China to Hong Kong in February 2003 when Liu Jianlun, a medical professor from Guangdong who unknowingly had SARS, checked into Room 911 at Hong Kong's Metropole Hotel.
The 64-year-old professor soon became sick from the illness and went to the hospital, where he died within two weeks.
But during his short stay at the hotel, he unwittingly infected several other guests.
Those people then took SARS with them to Singapore, Toronto and Hanoi.
(The hotel has since renamed Room 911 because of the stigma.)

"It’s a remarkable story, and it also identifies an issue which was clearly identified as a problem in 2003," Monto says.
"And that is that there were what we call ‘superspreaders’—people who seem to infect a lot of other people."
Scientists still don’t understand the biological reason why some infected people spread illness more than others do in the same situation, but they were a major factor in the spread of SARS.

"The other very important characteristic of SARS was the association or the particular problem of hospital-based infections, healthcare worker infections," Monto says.
"And this was a manifestation of the fact that sick patients and particularly very sick patients shed a lot of virus into the environment."
During the SARS outbreak, medical professionals like Dr.
Liu were at an increased risk of passing the illness to people outside of hospitals.

SARS Transmission Stopped by Quarantines and International Cooperation


Doctors and hospital staff talking inside a newly built special wards for SARS patients at the Infectious Disease Hospital in New Delhi, India on May 1, 2003.


Illnesses like SARS create panic because there are so many unknowns.
In the midst of the outbreak, scientists weren’t certain if they would be able to eliminate SARS completely, or if it would become a seasonal illness like the flu, which kills hundreds of thousands of people per year.
Luckily, doctors and scientists were able to completely eliminate SARS by isolating and quarantining people until the virus passed out of their system and they could no longer transmit it to others.

Because of international cooperation to isolate and quarantine people with SARS, the World Health Organization and affected countries were able to contain SARS by July 2003.
After that year, the only SARS cases came from isolated laboratory outbreaks where scientists were studying the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) that causes the illness.
Once again, officials contained these infections through isolation and quarantines.

China and Hong Kong suffered the most during the SARS outbreak.
In China, there were 5,327 cases and 349 deaths; and in Hong Kong, there were 1,755 cases and 299 deaths, according to the World Health Organization.
One of the lessons of the SARS outbreak was that in the future, China needed to have more transparency between its provinces and its national government.

Lessons Learned From SARS


Workers disinfect the waiting room of a Beijing railway station in the fight against SARS, on May 25, 2003.


"SARS was an alert as to how bad it could be," Monto says.
"China has had the experience over the last 15 years of dealing with small outbreaks of avian influenza—which have not transmitted extensively, but have continued to occur in China—so they’ve learned how to deal with these."

Preparedness for pandemics has also improved on a global level, says Anne W. Rimoin, a professor of epidemiology at the UCLA School of Public Health who specializes in the Ebola virus.

"Since the SARS outbreak, we’ve seen several other outbreaks," she says.
"We’ve had MERS, we’ve had the H1N1, that’s swine flu; we’ve had chikungunya, we’ve had Zika, and we’ve had several Ebola outbreaks since that time.
So I think that the world has just gotten much better at coordinating response."

In December 2019, a new coronavirus emerged in China.
By February 2, 2020, death tolls from the new virus in mainland China exceeded that of the 2002-2003 SARS epidemic, according to China’s Health Commission.



####
document number 12: 
China shares with world new progress in COVID-19 treatment


China has reported new progress in the research of COVID-19 drugs and therapies, sharing with the world its clinical experience and achievements and pushing forward international cooperation in the study of the disease.


China has reported new progress in the research of COVID-19 drugs and therapies, sharing with the world its clinical experience and achievements and pushing forward international cooperation in the study of the disease.


A staff member tests samples of the COVID-19 inactivated vaccine at a vaccine production plant of China National Pharmaceutical Group (Sinopharm) in Beijing, capital of China, April 11, 2020.
[Photo/Xinhua]

One of the highlights of the new progress is stem cell treatment, which has been used in more than 200 cases in Wuhan, the hardest-hit city amid the epidemic in China, Sun Yanrong, deputy head of the China National Center for Biotechnology Development under the Ministry of Science and Technology, said at a press conference on Tuesday.

Clinical trials show that the therapy is safe, and can increase the cure rate of severe patients by inhibiting lung inflammation and improve the respiratory function of patients in the rehabilitation period, according to Sun.

China has also made progress in convalescent plasma therapy.
So far, more than 700 patients have received such treatment with good effects.
The median length of stay in ICU of the patients receiving convalescent plasma therapy was significantly shorter than that in the control group, Sun said.

Since the outbreak of COVID-19, China has launched 27 projects in the research of drugs, therapies and related technologies.
More than 3,200 researchers from 152 hospitals, universities and institutions across China, including those on the front line of the fight against COVID-19 in Wuhan, have participated in the research.

At present, clinical trials on four drugs are in progress, and more than 10 research achievements have been included in the diagnosis and treatment guidelines on COVID-19, Sun said.

Currently, the main drugs used in treating COVID-19 cases in China include Chloroquine Phosphate, Favipiravir and traditional Chinese medicines.

Several Chinese research teams are focusing on the utilization of monoclonal antibodies, and have achieved some progress, Sun said.

In addition, Chinese researchers have developed human immunoglobulin from the COVID-19 convalescent plasma, which could be used in the clinical treatment of patients, as well as the passive immune protection of high-risk groups.

China is also promoting research on independently developed drugs, and accelerating the clinical research on a series of drugs including traditional Chinese medicines, Carrimycin, Tetrandrine and Azvudine, Sun said.

China has shared with the world its experience in epidemic prevention and control at the earliest possible date, with the results of Chinese scientists' clinical research on COVID-19 quickly published in international academic journals.

According to incomplete statistics, Chinese research teams have conducted academic exchanges and discussions with over 140 countries and regions on new research progress and clinical application experience involving traditional Chinese medicines, Chloroquine Phosphate, Favipiravir, Tocilizumab, convalescent plasma therapy and stem cell treatment.

A number of Chinese research achievements have been applied in the clinical treatment of COVID-19 in other countries.

The World Health Organization and some countries are also carrying out clinical research on Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine.
Several drugs and therapies used by China such as convalescent plasma therapy and Tocilizumab have also been approved by many countries in their treatment or clinical research, Sun said.

She said the development of the drugs and therapies requires the wisdom of the whole world.
Chloroquine Phosphate was invented by German scientists 80 years ago, Favipiravir was developed by Japanese scientists 20 years ago, and Carrimycin was created by Chinese scientists 30 years ago.

She said China is actively expanding the channels of international scientific and technological cooperation and promoting joint clinical research on the disease.

MORE FROM China SCIO





####
document number 13: 
Zika virus cases spread in Latin America, Caribbean



Haiti, Ecuador and Brazil have announced that they have been hit by an outbreak of the Zika virus, a mosquito-borne ailment that causes birth defects and is rapidly spreading through Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Zika virus is transmitted by Aedes species mosquitoes, which also spread dengue and chikungunya viruses.
Zika causes a mild illness with fever, rash, joint pain and conjunctivitis, with symptoms usually lasting under a week.

But in pregnant women, the virus can spread to the fetus and cause brain shrinkage - a rare condition called microcephaly that severely limits a child's intellectual and physical development - or death.


Brazil has been the hardest hit, documenting more than 3,500 cases of microcephaly between October 2015 and January 2016.

Four of those cases have recently been analysed, showing that babies were infected with the Zika virus while they were in the womb and that it reached their brains.

Two of the cases involved miscarriages, and two of the babies died soon after birth.
The Brazilian government said on Saturday it was directing funds to a biomedical research centre to help develop a vaccine against the virus.

Ecuador confirms cases

Ecuador said on Friday it has detected two new cases of the Zika virus in the country.
Officials had previously detected four people who arrived from other countries with the disease.
But this is the first time it has been transmitted on Ecuadorian soil, said Veronica Espinosa, deputy cabinet minister responsible for monitoring outbreaks.

"We have now detected, confirmed by laboratory tests, the first two native cases.
That is, we now have cases of the virus being transmitted by mosquito bites that happened in Ecuadoran territory," she told a press conference.

First Haiti detection

Also on Friday, Haiti's Public Health Minister Florence Duperval Guillaume said there have been five confirmed cases of the Zika virus in the country.
All the cases are in the area of Port-au-Prince, the overcrowded capital.

The United States on Friday warned pregnant women to avoid travel to 14 countries and territories in the Caribbean and Latin America due to the virus.

The level two travel alert applies to Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Martinique, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, Venezuela and Puerto Rico.



####
document number 14: 
New Coronavirus Drug Shows Promise in Animal Tests


Workers at a private manufacturing unit on the outskirts of Srinagar, India, make face masks to meet their demands in view of the spread of the novel coronavirus pandemic on April 6, 2020.
Credit:


An oral medicine was able to hinder the coronavirus behind COVID-19 as it attempted to replicate itself in human lung cells in test tubes, scientists reported Monday.
It also hampered closely related coronaviruses from reproducing in mice for several days and improved their lung functions.
*

The drug, called EIDD-2801, interferes with a key mechanism that allows the SARS-CoV-2 virus to reproduce in high numbers and cause infections, the researchers explained in the journal

Science Translational Medicine

.
Human trials have not yet been done, but if the effect is similar in people, the drug would be the first pill available to help with the COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in more than 1.3 million cases and about 76,400 deaths worldwide.
An oral medication would be a boon, because it would be easier to give to more people than an intravenous injection.

The study was done by a team at Emory University, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville, Tenn.
A company that has licensed the drug, Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, has just been granted permission from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to begin 10 patient trials of the antiviral pill in the next few months.

Advertisement


The same university collaboration had already found that Gilead Sciences’ experimental medicine remdesivir was effective in shutting down replication of the coronaviruses that caused the original SARS and MERS epidemics.
Remdesivir has received attention because it entered clinical trials against SARS-CoV-2 in March, and the first results may come by late April.
The findings announced yesterday indicate that EIDD-2801 was possibly even more successful in disrupting coronavirus replication than the Gilead drug.
On March 20 the researchers investigating EIDD-2801, co-led by Tim Sheahan of Chapel Hill, posted the results of their animal studies on the preprint server bioRxiv while submitting them for peer review.
Given the current COVID-19 crisis, "it was important to share," says George Painter, a professor of chemistry and executive director of the Emory Institute for Drug Development, which first produced the drug.

Back in 2018 Painter and the labs he leads identified EIDD-2801’s activity during a search for a universal influenza medicine.
Last October, before the pandemic hit, the Emory program got $15.9 million from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases to perform human tests of the drug against the flu virus that was likely to be circulating later in the year.
When SARS-CoV-2 emerged, Painter’s group immediately shifted focus.

EIDD-2801 inhibits the coronavirus’s self-copying operations in a manner that is different from remdesivir.
While remdesivir brings that replication process to a full stop, EIDD-2801 introduces mutations—mistakes—into the virus’s RNA as it makes copies so that the viral RNA becomes so damaged that it cannot infect cells.
Another feature of the drug is that it is able to work against a host of other RNA viruses.
Thus, it could serve as a multipurpose antiviral, much in the way some antibiotics can work against a wide variety of bacteria.
In several preclinical studies, researchers from multiple labs have shown that EIDD-2801 was effective against several strains of influenza, as well as the viruses for respiratory syncytial virus and the viruses for chikungunya, Venezuelan equine encephalitis and Eastern equine encephalitis—all microbes that intermittently pop up in different parts of the world and produce widespread sickness in their wake.

Advertisement


The compound may be initially beneficial as a "prophylaxis [that] health care workers can take to prevent an infection," says Wayne Holman, co-founder of Miami-based Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, which has licensed the drug from Emory’s nonprofit biotech company Drug Innovation Ventures at Emory (DRIVE).
Another potential use of EIDD-2801 might be to protect uninfected nursing home residents and workers if an outbreak occurs inside a facility.
Holman says the wider goal is to have an oral pill that can be taken twice a day by patients at home early in the course of the disease to prevent it from progressing to hospitalization, mechanical ventilation or death.

In addition to planning clinical trials in the U.S., Ridgeback has also asked U.K. authorities to start tests there as well.
"We’ve done three to four years of development work in just the past three to four weeks in response to the new pandemic," Holman says.

Read more about the coronavirus outbreak

here

.

*Editor’s Note (4/7/20): This paragraph was edited after posting to correct the description of the study’s findings.
Only coronaviruses related to SARS-CoV-2 were tested in mice, not SARS-CoV-2 itself.



####
document number 15: 
What Sparked An E. Coli Outbreak In Lettuce?
Scientists Trace A Surprising Source


The Food and Drug Administration quickly identified romaine lettuce as the source of a months-long outbreak, but the foodborne illness investigation has been one of the agency's most complicated in years.


The illnesses started appearing in late March.
Here and there, across the country, people were checking themselves in to hospitals, sick from toxic

E. coli

bacteria.
At least 200 people got sick.
Five of them died.

Investigators quickly identified romaine lettuce as the source of the outbreak, but have had trouble pinpointing the cause for months.
Now, the Food and Drug Administration has a theory for how

E. coli

ended up on that lettuce.
According to the FDA, it probably came from a large cattle feedlot at one end of a valley near Yuma, Ariz., which is one of the country's biggest lettuce-growing areas.

The finding has put lettuce growers in Yuma in a tough spot.
The feedlot has been their neighbor for many years.
Some vegetable farmers are wondering whether they can still co-exist with all those cattle nearby.

The investigation that led to this quandary has been long and sometimes frustrating.

It began with patients like Louise Fraser, 66, who checked herself in to the Hunterdon Medical Center in central New Jersey.
Fraser was convinced that she knew what had taken her down: a fundraiser feast for the local fire department a day before she got sick.

"I was eating fried clams, pierogies, french fries, and then I topped it off by going to our local ice cream store and having ice cream.
I'm thinking that's what made me sick," she says.

Within a few days, though, interviews with other sick people revealed a common thread.
Nearly all of them, including Fraser, remembered eating something that contained romaine lettuce.

And investigators from the FDA were on the case, trying to track the contaminated lettuce back to its source.
"Every moment is of the essence" during this phase, says Stephen Ostroff, deputy commissioner for food and veterinary medicine at the FDA.

They wanted to identify a specific batch of contaminated lettuce so they could order a recall.
When the FDA's army of investigators knock on doors at restaurants and grocery stores, they say "show us your records as to the romaine lettuce that you were serving, or that you had sitting on the grocery store shelf on that day," Ostroff says.

But the trail was confusing.
Some restaurants got their romaine from a bunch of processors.
And processors sometimes used lettuce from a bunch of different farms and chopped it all up together.
The investigators couldn't narrow it down, and "this was very frustrating," Ostroff says.

In those early days of the investigation, they only knew that the contaminated lettuce came from the lettuce growing area around Yuma, Ariz.
At the time of the outbreak, Yuma was producing most of the country's lettuce.

Almost all of the lettuce in the U.S. comes from either Yuma or the Salinas Valley in California.
The two areas take turns.
California grows lettuce in the spring and summer; Yuma takes over in the fall and winter.

In mid-April, the FDA advised consumers to avoid any romaine lettuce from the Yuma region.
Most consumers, though, couldn't tell from the packaging, or even from supermarket employees, whether their lettuce came from Yuma or somewhere else.
Millions of them just threw their lettuce in the trash or stopped buying it — even in late April and May, when most of that lettuce was coming from California.

Meanwhile, the investigation continued.
Many food safety experts expected it to lead to a single farm or a factory where the contamination happened.
That's what happened during the last big

E. coli

outbreak that was linked to salad greens, in 2006, which investigators eventually blamed on wild pigs that got into a field of spinach in California.

Scientists from the FDA and the University of Arizona test water from an irrigation ditch near Yuma, Ariz., in early August.
The FDA found toxic E. coli in another irrigation canal less than a mile from this one.


"You sort of expect history to be a guide, and I think that most people in food safety expected a similar result to what we had in 2006," says Bill Marler, a lawyer who makes his living suing companies that sell food that makes people sick.
He's representing about 100 people who got sick in this outbreak.

But in this case, it proved impossible.
The trails of contaminated lettuce did not converge on any single point.
Instead, there were lots of trails, leading to different processing plants and a bunch of different farms in Yuma, miles apart.
The FDA even published a chart of the "traceback" pattern, just to show people how complicated it was.
It was particularly frustrating, Ostroff says, "because it makes our job infinitely more difficult, in terms of explaining what happened."

Something mysterious had happened in the fields of Yuma.

Most of the farmers in Yuma didn't really want to talk about

E. coli

.
It's not a pleasant topic.
Steve Alameda is co-owner of Topflavor Farms, a big lettuce grower.
His wide fields are mostly bare dirt right now, baking in the oppressive summer heat.
But when the weather turns cooler in a few months, all the farms around here will be green with lettuce.

"This is a huge salad factory," he says.
He's talking about the whole valley, 5 miles wide and 50 meandering miles long.
During the vegetable-growing season, about a thousand trucks with 50 million pounds of products drive out of here every day.

A few weeks ago, FDA investigators announced a break in the lettuce case.
They found

E. coli

that exactly matched the genetic strain that had made people sick.
It turned up in a canal that carries water to lots of different vegetable farms in this valley.

The canal runs right past a huge cattle feedlot, covering many acres.
About 100,000 cows are standing there on bare ground, clustered around long troughs filled with corn and hay.

E. coli

bacteria live in cattle.
The FDA thinks that

E. coli

in manure from these cattle probably washed into the irrigation ditch, or blew into it, and water carried those bacteria into vegetable fields.

Alameda isn't completely convinced by this theory.
It leaves a lot of questions unanswered.
For instance, irrigation water doesn't typically touch the lettuce leaves, so how did the contamination happen?
Why did it affect romaine lettuce and not the other kinds of lettuce and vegetables growing in those fields?
And what happened this spring?
After all, the cattle have been there for decades.

Channah Rock, a water quality specialist at the University of Arizona, says there are clues that point toward a slightly different theory.
She thinks that dust from the feedlot might have blown in the wind and settled on romaine leaves that had been damaged by an unusual freeze, causing the leaves to "blister."
Perhaps, she says, those damaged leaves were particularly vulnerable to

E. coli

contamination.

However it happened, though, the most likely explanation seems to be that these cattle were the source of the outbreak.
That leaves Yuma's lettuce growers in a bind.
They have to convince supermarkets and restaurants that it won't happen again, even though the cattle are still there.

"Make no mistake about it, we sell this as a healthy product that's safe, and when people lose confidence in that, we don't have anything," Alameda says.

Farmers know that they have to do something different, Alameda says.
They're going to make sure lettuce fields are farther away from the cattle.
Some farmers will start treating their irrigation water with chlorine to kill the bacteria, like drinking water.

There have even been conversations about doing something more drastic.
Some lettuce growers are thinking that maybe they should band together and buy that feedlot from its current owner, Five Rivers Cattle Feeding, and shut it down.

For its part, the cattle company issued a statement that says while it has fully cooperated with federal investigators, it is unaware of any evidence specifically linking its operation to the outbreaks.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = hacking
document number 1: 
How Hacking Team Created Spyware that Allowed the FBI To Monitor Tor Browser


In July of 2012, FBI contractor Pradeep Lal contacted the customer support department of the Italian company Hacking Team, a maker of spyware for law enforcement and intelligence agencies worldwide.
Lal needed help; he had used Hacking Team software to break into and monitor an investigative target’s computer, but the monitoring wasn’t working as well as Lal expected.
It reported what addresses his target visited in normal web browsers, but not when his target used Tor Browser, software designed to mask sensitive web surfing.

Lal described his problem succinctly, complaining on Hacking Team’s customer website that the company’s "URL collector does not collect web traffic on TOR browser," according to a large trove of emails and other documents recently obtained by one or more computer hackers.
He then outlined the steps someone might take to reproduce the problem he encountered with Hacking Team spyware:

download TOR browser bundle.
Surf web through TOR browser.
Infect the target with an agent with www collector enabled.
WWW traffic is not collect when target surfs through TOR browser.


Hacking Team’s support staff responded the next day, writing, "From our understanding the tbb [Tor Browser Bundle] is just a customized Firefox, we will look at it for future releases."
Less than two weeks later they told Lal that his requested feature was in the works: "Dear Client, next RCS [Remote Control System] release (8.2.0) will capture URL from the TOR browser.
Thank you."
(An April 2013 email laments Lal’s departure from the FBI.)

Hacking Team, at the FBI’s request, had just added the ability to monitor ostensibly anonymous Tor Browser traffic from a target infected with Hacking Team malware.
The Tor Browser monitoring capability did not represent a breach of the Tor network, which bounces web traffic around the world to hide its destination.
It’s impossible for any security software, including Tor Browser, to continue to protect someone after their computer has been hacked.
But the incident serves as a reminder of the government’s strong interest in bypassing the protections Tor offers — and of how vulnerable computer users can be even when using proven and secure privacy systems.

Tor is, by all accounts, such a system.
Tor is not just a network of computers, it’s also the open-source software that runs that network, helping people access the internet anonymously.
When you use Tor Browser, you no longer visit websites directly but instead through a network of Tor nodes.
This prevents the websites you visit from knowing your real IP address, information that can be used to pinpoint your location and identity.
With Tor, all a website knows is that you’re some anonymous Tor user.
Even someone monitoring your network traffic — having cracked your wifi, for example — will have no idea what sites you’re visiting.

(Disclosure: The Tor Project, which helps develop Tor and Tor Browser, has received money from the Freedom of the Press Foundation, where I sit on the board.
It has also received money from the Omidyar Foundation, co-founded by Pierre Omidyar, who funds

The Intercept

‘s parent company First Look Media.)

Tor Browser was able to, for a time, thwart Hacking Team’s flagship product, Remote Control System, which normally allows an operator to, among other forms of surveillance, spy on all of the network traffic leaving a hacked computer and report back to its client a list of web addresses the target was visiting.
Such web snooping didn’t initially work on Tor Browser.
All RCS could see was encrypted traffic going into the Tor network — basically useless information.
Spying on Tor traffic would take more effort.

Hacking Team described how it solved the problem in a PowerPoint presentation, bragging that, "Our solution is the only way to intercept TOR traffic at the moment."

When a user opens Tor Browser, their computer starts the Tor program in the background, and in the foreground it opens up a modified version of Firefox that’s configured to force all its traffic to go through the Tor program.
The solution was to modify Tor Browser on a hacked computer to force all of its traffic to go through an outside server that the attacker controls, rather than the one provided by the Tor program.
When the hacked user loads a website in Tor Browser, the malware is then able to spy on the traffic before it gets handed off to the Tor network to be anonymized.
Last week the Tor Project published their own brief analysis of this capability.

But Hacking Team had no capability against the Tor network itself; it could only spy on people if their computer was already infected by Hacking Team spyware.
This was made clear in a series of customer service communications (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) with the FBI’s John Solano starting in September 2014, two years after the Tor monitoring feature was added to Hacking Team software.
Solano wanted to find out the real IP address of a target shielded by the Tor network, but he had not yet hacked his target.

"We will need to send him an email with a document or pdf attachement [sic] to hopefully install the scout," Solano later wrote, after some back and forth with Hacking Team representatives.

It’s not clear from reading the support ticket if Solano ever successfully hacked his target with Hacking Team’s malware.
What is clear is that, as of late 2014, the FBI was struggling to figure out how to deanonymize a Tor user.

In another Hacking Team customer support encounter, a government was trying to use the Tor network rather than crack it.
Last month, a user called "devilangel", who works for the South Korean Army, contacted Hacking Team trying to troubleshoot problems logging into the support website from Tor Browser.
The support website requires clients to log in with not only a username and password but also with an encryption certificate.
This certificate must be installed in a web browser, and devilangel was having trouble doing that in Tor Browser.
"We are using certificates for secure communication using Support Portal," devilangel wrote.
"With recent firefox, you know, Tor Browser(v4.5.x) seems not to support PKCS#12(*.p12)," a file format used to bundle encryption certificates.

It’s not clear exactly why the South Korean Army wanted to use Tor Browser to interact with Hacking Team.
But it is clear that Tor provides the same level of security and anonymity to military users as it does to anyone else.
Tor is used by a diverse range of people: Activists, journalists, military, law enforcement, businesses executives, and ordinary people trying not to get tracked, as well as criminals of all stripes.
This diversity allows any actor — government users like the South Korea military, activists, or illicit users — to remain anonymous.

On behalf of devilangel, Hacking Team’s support staff began troubleshooting, and discovered that both the stable version of Tor Browser, as well as the experimental beta version, contained a bug that prevented users from installing encryption certificates.

"We suggest to use a different way for your connections to HT Support Portal, if you still need to hide your IP address: VPNs, public proxies, VPS via VNC/RDP, browser add-ons like Anonimox…", the support staff suggested to the South Korean Army.



####
document number 2: 
How the CIA Allegedly Infected Offline Computers


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


A story from Motherboard.
Hacking air-gapped machines—computers that are not connected to the internet, so theoretically less vulnerable—is always pretty interesting.
On Wednesday, Wikileaks published a series of alleged CIA documents that supposedly show how the intelligence agency's malware was designed to infect these sort of targets.
Naturally, the documents indicate how the CIA has continued to develop its own hacking tools, allegedly targeting devices from smart TVs to internet routers.
According to one of the documents, "Brutal Kangaroo is a tool suite for targeting closed networks by air gap jumping using thumbdrives."
The 11 files allegedly come from the CIA's Engineering Development Group, and appear to date from 2012 to 2016.
In short, a CIA operator first remotely installs a piece of malware on a system connected to the internet, the "primary host."
Then, an unwitting user inserts a USB drive into that system, and the malware infects the drive.
The user then, hopefully, plugs that infected USB into an air-gapped computer unavailable to the CIA.
The malware does whatever it has been configured to carry out, and sends any data back to the CIA once it is plugged into the primary host again.
Once the malware has infected a target, Brutal Kangaroo sets up its own "custom covert network" within the air-gapped computers, and can collect files, survey the victim machines, launch its own executables, and more, according to one of the documents.
The malware can also delete a predetermined list of files, one of the documents adds.
One section of a user guide lays out problems that certain antivirus products have allegedly posed to the CIA malware.
Symantec's product supposedly generated a pop-up when the malware tried to automatically run, as did another product.
According to the guide, security vendor BitDefender blocked "ALL Execution Vectors."
(A presentation included in the cache includes a diagram that implies detection of the malware has, at least at one point, been generally low).
Famously, the Stuxnet attack, widely believed to be the work of American and Israeli intelligence and which targeted the Iranian nuclear program, also made use of infected USB drives.
In a court filing from earlier this year, the Department of Justice may have accidentally confirmed the authenticity of the CIA documents.
Back in April, building on information previously distributed by Wikileaks, researchers at cybersecurity firm Symantec identified 40 allegedly linked hacking operations around the world, including targets in government, financial, energy, aerospace, and natural resource sectors.

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Newsbeat Radio, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 3: 
Chinese State Hackers Suspected Of Malicious Cyber Attack On U.S. Utilities



The notorious Chinese state-sponsored hacking group APT10, which is believed to act for the country's Ministry of State Security, is the most likely culprit behind a cyber campaign targeting U.S. utility companies in July.
The disclosure on August 1 was made by researchers at Proofpoint, who warned that "persistent targeting of any entity that provides critical infrastructure should be considered an acute risk—the profile of this campaign is indicative of specific risk to U.S.-based entities in the utilities sector."

The spear-phishing campaign targeted company employees with emails purporting to be from the National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES), emails that claimed to be delivering professional examination results but which were actually delivering "malicious" Microsoft Word attachments.
Threat researchers at Proofpoint broke the news and dubbed the command and control malware "LookBack."

According to Proofpoint's Michael Raggi and Dennis Schwarz, once the emailed Microsoft Word attachment is opened, a malicious VBA macro drops files onto the host computer which then provide the malware with the command and control framework needed to access data on the machine.
The malware can attack and mimic a wide range of processes on an infected machine—primarily, though, the objective is to steal data files and take operational screenshots.


APT10 made headlines in June, when it was reported that the group had compromised the systems of at least ten cellular carriers around the world to steal metadata related to specific users linked to China.
While no firm connection has yet been made between APT10 and this latest attack, Proofpoint's analysts found "similarities" between the macros used in this attack and those found to be targeting the Japanese media sector a year ago.
LookBack "resembles a historic TTP utilized in those campaigns," the researchers explained, albeit the specific malware "has not previously been associated with a known APT actor."

In inferrring a link, the researchers noted the mix and match nature of the coding which suggests "an attempt to evade static signature detection—while maintaining the integrity of the installation mechanism, which had been historically been used to target different sectors and geographies."
In other words, hackers attempting to hide the origins of their code without reducing its effectiveness.

So let's step back.
These are not isolated incidents.
We know there are now organized campaigns on the part of Chinese (and Russian, Iranian and North Korean) hackers to target critical infrastructure, financial services and aerospace and defense.
We know that the current hybrid cyber warfare plays on many levels, and as the U.S. focuses on the military domain, state hackers from enemy states see the wider commercial sectors as far more vulnerable and effective a place to attack.
Week by week, the extent of the vulnerabilities become ever clearer.
And these are in addition to the broad-brush non-targeted nuisance campaigns as seen recently with warnings over Microsoft Outlook.

"While definitive attribution in this instance requires further study," the researchers conclude, "the risk that these campaigns pose to utility providers is clear."
And these campaigns are well-conceived.
An email that claims to be delivering failed examination results compels its recipient.
These are highly-targeted attacks—some are designed to steal significant IP, others to plant vulnerabilities in sectors seen as key to everyday nation-state operations.
Energy, utilities and communications are high on that list.

The wider energy sector has found itself front and center in the hybrid cyber warfare campaign that has extended the battlefield.
In recent months, Russia has been the archvillain of those campaigns.
But China plies its hacking trade widely, and so this latest disclosure comes as little surprise.

In the meantime, back to the specifics.
"The utilization of this distinct delivery methodology," Proofpoint concluded, "highlights the continuing threats posed by sophisticated adversaries to utilities systems and critical infrastructure providers."
There is a malicious campaign underway, it carries risk, and it's far from certain it has now been contained.

APT10—Advanced Persistent Threat 10—is known for long-term, targeted campaigns, harvesting information as might an actual state intel agency.
While the disclosure focuses on the technical make-up of the malware, other questions surrounding the objective of the campaign itself remain unanswered.
And with the malware now ready, there are countless other delivery guises that can be tried.



####
document number 4: 
Meet Mafiaboy, The 'Bratty Kid' Who Took Down The Internet


Michael Calce, who went by the online name Mafiaboy when he launched a massive cyberattack at the age of 15, now works as a security consultant for companies trying to protect their online systems.


This week, the country's second-largest health insurance company, Anthem, said hackers broke into a database with personal information about 80 million of its customers.
It's just the latest in a string of large-scale cyber-attacks — Sony, Staples, Home Depot, and JPMorgan Chase have all been attacked in the last nine months alone.

In January, President Obama said the cybercrime laws that are supposed to protect consumers from such attacks — and give the government tools to prosecute cybercriminals — need to be updated.

Many of those laws are more than a decade old, the direct result of one hacking incident that was a wake-up call for the U.S. government.

While they might need an update, they're better than no laws at all — and for that, we have a 15-year-old to thank.

In 2000, a high school student named Michael Calce, who went by the online handle Mafiaboy, brought down the websites of Amazon, CNN, Dell, E*Trade, eBay, and Yahoo!.
At the time, Yahoo!
was the biggest search engine in the world.

"The New York Stock Exchange, they were freaking out, because they were all investing in these e-commerce companies," he remembers.

"And then it's like, 'OK — a 15-year-old kid can shut us down at any point?
Is our money really safe?'
"

For years after the attack, Calce declined to speak to the media, but he's recently begun to open up about his story.
He says his goal had nothing to do with money — and that ultimately, he thinks, his attack has a positive impact.

The story begins when Calce got his first computer, at the age of 6.

"I was a pretty bratty kid.
I come from a divorced family.
My father had custody on the weekends and he wasn't exactly sure how to preoccupy me so he took a computer from his work and brought it home and was like 'Here, figure out what to do with it.'
"

A few years later, Calce got a free trial of AOL.
It was his first time on the internet, and within a few days the 9-year-old hacked the system so he could stay online past the 30-day trial period.

He got more and more involved in online hacker groups.
In 2000, he launched the hack that made him famous — first taking over a handful of university networks, and then harnessing their combined computing power to attack outside websites.

"Basically when I hit enter on the keyboard, [the university networks] all respond at the same exact time and basically overwhelm websites with too much information," he explains.
It's called a denial-of-service attack.

Within hours, he had taken down six major websites.

"The overall purpose was to intimidate other hacker groups," says Calce.

Back then, he says, "the whole of the hacking community was all about notoriety and exploration, whereas you look at hackers today and it's all about monetization."

For the national security apparatus, the attack was a wake-up call.
President Clinton convened a cybersecurity working group.
Attorney General Janet Reno announced a manhunt for Mafiaboy.

"You know I'm a pretty calm, collected, cool person, but when you have the president of the United States and attorney general basically calling you out and saying 'We're going to find you' ... at that point I was a little bit worried," says Calce.

He was right to be worried.
The FBI was on his trail.

"I started to notice this utility van that was parked at the end of my street at, like, Sunday at 4 a.m.," remembers Calce.

"It was pretty obvious that they were surveilling my place."

The case eventually went to trial in Canada, where Calce is from.
The Clinton administration sent cybersecurity experts to testify.

"It was a pretty big ordeal," says Calce.
"It didn't really matter what I said at that point.
They just wanted to make an example out of me."

He was charges with more than 50 crimes and eventually sentenced to eight months in a youth group home.

Today, Calce is what's called a white hat hacker.
Companies hire him to help identify security flaws in their systems and design better security features.
He says the internet is a far scarier place today than it was back in 2000.
For one, there is more and more at stake as we rely ever more on online systems for our daily lives.

Looking back, he thinks some good did come from the attack he launched.

"It raised a lot of issues," he says.
"It definitely advanced and created a pretty big focus on security, and the problems and inherent flaws that come with computers and internet."



####
document number 5: 
Hacking Reconnaissance Finding Vulnerabilities in Your Target Using Nmap


Nice one, I would recomend adding in some Arch linux commands in for some of us that use Arch =)


How to know what is the highest vulnerability?


Razif:

Welcome to Null Byte!

Finding the system's greatest vulnerability is tricky.
First, you need to know as much about the system as possible.
This includes the OS, the applications, the ports, the services, etc.
Then, you can look into various databases for vulnerabilities.
Check out this tutorial.

OTW


I noticed that most of your recon tutorials are for web servers.
Would i be able to do this with the ip of a computer?
Also if the computer wasn't on my network could I use the public IP?


Deliveryman:

You can use nmap on any system you can reach with a ping.
That includes on your local LAN or a public IP.
The reason that these tutorials are for web servers is that the web server has a public facing access.
This can provide an entry point to the network.

OTW


Thanks, so how would I scan for ip's and ports open on those ip's, when they connected to a different network than mine?


That is problematic.
One thing you can do is to get a foothold inside the network.
In other words, compromise one system and then scan.
If there is a wireless network, you can use netdiscover to scan inside the network.


oh, so the only way to scan a remote network is socially engineering someone into downloading and running a payload, then running a scan from the meterpreter?

Thanks for all your help.


Its not the only way, but probably the simplest way.
You could also compromise any of the public facing systems such as the web server, dns server, etc without social engineering.


okay, thanks for all these tutorials.
there very helpful and informative.
it's also much easier than browsing the web for an hour looking for something helpful.


You are very welcome.

I hope you will join Null Byte and follow me as there is so much to learn that I still have not put on here yet.


After I do a vuln scan (--script vuln) I always get "Hosts are all up (not vulnerable)" What would be the next step to get into the system?
Or how do I know what part is vulnerable and what exploit to use (or how to write one) Anyone got a tutorial on that?


sir, when i type sudo nmap -sS -A 50.22.84.102 command in my kali the terminal just stuck and still loading



####
document number 6: 
How a SamSam-like attack happens, and what you can do about it



By Andrew Brandt

The threat actors behind the SamSam ransomware, now identified by the FBI in an indictment (and very fancy Most Wanted poster), pioneered a very specific playbook in their attacks that has inspired a rash of copycats.
In July, we published a report that goes into great detail about the SamSam TTP, so if this is of interest to you, maybe check it out.
Here’s a quick explainer of their TTP (tactics, techniques procedures) and some easy countermeasures you can enact today.

Summary of the attack procedures used by SamSam


The SamSam attackers started by conducting surveillance of the victims.
They wanted to know if the victims had sufficiently deep pockets to pay the ransom, which over time averaged out to the mid-$30,000 as Bitcoin exchange rates fluctuated.

SamSam target acquisition


In fact, the surveillance may have used a number of freely available tools, but the primary motives seem to be (1) whether the victims were based in the "Anglosphere" (English-speaking world, but primarily in the US) and (2) had money, and that’s it.
Some ransomware attackers appear to have avoided attacking schools or hospitals, but not SamSam.

Tools employed by SamSam during the intrusion phase of the attack


The attackers relied on "low-hanging fruit" to break in to networks.
Most attacks begin with the attackers brute-forcing passwords for Windows machines that have Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) exposed through a hole in the firewall.

If you have ports open in your firewall to let RDP through from the internet, and it isn’t behind a VPN, please close those ports now.
It doesn’t matter how strong the Windows password is.
It is not worth the risk to keep it open.


Some early attacks began with exploits against vulnerabilities in a application service called JBOSS (now known as Wildfly).
The attackers use a publicly available grey-hat hacking tool called JexBoss.
An IoC of this type of attack is the file jbossass.war (MD5: CBDEAF83F58A64B09DF58B94063E0146).
This method quickly fell out of favor in lieu of using RDP.

SamSam use conventional systems administration and some grey-hat hacking tools


Once the SamSam attackers gained a foothold in the network, they used a variety of grey-hat and systems administrator tools to escalate their own privileges.
The goal: Obtain Domain Administrator credentials, usually by sniffing for them using Mimikatz.

The goal was to take control of the Domain Controller


As soon as they had the Domain Administrator password, the SamSam attackers took control of the Domain Controller.
They leveraged the DC to distribute the ransomware to every machine on the network, but they didn’t do it right away.
They did tests first, before deployment, to make sure the DC has write privileges to the machines under its bailiwick.

SamSam pushed an installation using the free Microsoft Sysinternals tool PsExec


Using Microsoft’s free tool PsExec, the attackers pushed ransomware to every machine they could reach from the DC, all at once.

They waited until late at night, over weekends, or holidays to launch the attack, when the fewest people might notice before it was too late.

In cases where an endpoint security product was preventing the malware from running, they taught themselves how to use the administrator consoles that enterprises use to manage security products, and would selectively disable security products using (you guessed it) stolen admin credentials.

At the very least, administrator-level users must use two-factor authentication for all sensitive services and accounts.


The PsExec command launched a batch file and required a password, which makes analysis harder


To make it harder for security experts to analyze the malware, they built samples unique to each victim organization, and executed them using a batch file that decrypted the payload with a password they changed for each attack.
The malware always deleted its own installer any any other traces as a final step.
Getting copies of the files associated with the attack has been a challenge since the earliest days, but it wasn’t impossible.

The SamSam attackers refined the encryption procedure many times over two years


The SamSam ransomware pushed the limits for efficiency, too.
It encrypted the most important files first, and then

everything else

that wasn’t essential to keeping the machine running.

The consquences were more serious than with conventional ransomware.
For instance, you couldn’t just restore data files from backups to get back up and running, because all your applications are also inaccessible.
You need to reimage the disk first, and restore all the applications, before you could restore the data files.

It was a purely evil act and virtually guaranteed that data was unrecoverable in a reasonable amount of time at the scale of whole networks, all at once.
If it took (just for example) 30 minutes to reimage a disk on a single machine, and another 15 to bring back the data from offline backups, how long would it take to do the same on 100 machines?
How about on 1000 machines?

Could you do this for a massive global organization quickly enough not to incur heavy losses?
What if you weren’t just a gaming network and lives literally were hanging in the balance?

Faced with a prospect of, perhaps, weeks of downtime and painstaking recovery, and the ensuing lost productivity, it’s not surprising so many victims opted to pay the SamSam attackers.
For many, it was a matter of organizational survival, though a costly lesson to learn.

SamSam only attacked a handful of organizations at a time, but had a high success rate


Every victim was provided with a unique .onion address on the dark web.
At the other end, there was a kind of chat system where the victim interacted directly with the SamSam attackers.

SamSam’s attackers communicate with victims through a bespoke dark web chat page


These disappeared as soon as the victim paid.
Only a few screenshots exist.
This one was shared with us by a victim who worked with us to investigate the attack retrospectively.

We tracked Bitcoin payments to a small number of wallets.
The cryptocurrency was then "tumbled" to obfuscate its origin and destination.

The attackers laundered their Bitcoin through "tumbler" services


We traced many of these back to their origins and found something quite interesting

While many victims, including the City of Atlanta, openly admitted they had been targeted by SamSam, more than half of the paying victims never made any kind of public announcement at all.

More than half the SamSam victims never made a public announcement about the attack


All these "silent victims" were large businesses.

It’s also clear that the SamSam attackers had a single country primarily in their crosshairs, once you correlate the victim organizations’ location.

Data from January 2016 to July 2018, including "silent victims"


Now that we know who the attackers were, the motivation seems kind of obvious.

The news about the FBI identifying and indicting the SamSam threat actors makes us happy, but it doesn’t mean the case is closed.
Far from it, in fact.

Nobody’s been arrested, and there is still a lot of low-hanging fruit out there.

Worse, several other threat groups have picked up on this modus operandi, and are mimicking the SamSam technique to spread ransomware.
These white-glove, hand delivered, targeted attacks are still going on.


So, we all have a lot of work to do.
This fight is only entering the next phase.
Close those RDP ports!
Patch your old boxes!
Segment the network so everything can’t be reached from a single point.
At the very least, pick your low hanging fruit and make some fruit salad!

We’ll be covering the rise of targeted ransomware and its aftermath, right here in our SophosLabs blog.
Join us as we fight this scourge!



####
document number 7: 
The most extensive cyber attack in Hong Kong


From October 1 to the end of October, an international hacker group "Anonymous" has declared a cyber attack campaign called Operation Hong Kong (OpHongKong) against Hong Kong websites.
It was the most extensive and longest territory-wide cyber attack in the history of Hong Kong, targeting websites of government departments, critical organizations, political organizations, press media, and some non-government organizations.

The attack calmed down on around 20-Oct with only isolated attacks carrying on afterwards.

The attackers were quite high profile.
They announced their target websites on social media websites and they openly recruited volunteers to join the attack.
They even provide one-click DDoS (distributed denial-of-service) attack tools so that people without technical know-how could participate.

There were mainly 3 types of attacks in the campaign: web defacement, DDoS attack and intrusion of information systems respectively.
For DDoS attack, attackers used web application attacks, malformed network protocols, SYN flood, volumetric attacks and Wordpress pingback as the means.

According to HKCERT's statistics (https://www.hkcert.org/my_url/en/blog/14102201), from Oct 2 to 22, there were 38 non-government websites defaced and 23 non-government websites attacked by DDoS.
All of them have resumed to normal operation.

Response actions of HKCERT


HKCERT had proactively and promptly responded to the incident in the following ways:


worked closely with the Government and Police round the clock to exchange information and monitored the target sites

informed the public of the attacks immediately and advised them how to secure their systems

informed the victims and advised them on how to recover the affected websites

informed the hosting companies of targets to prepare for the attacks affecting their network

issued takedown requests to administrators whose servers were hosting DDoS attack scripts

warned Internet users not to participate in any cyber attacks.


Some of our blog articles were republished in some IT blogs and discussion forums in Hong Kong to let more people know.
HKCERT would like to express our gratitude to the kind assistance of these blog and forum administrators.

Do Better Security with Lessons Learnt


HKCERT likes to share with you some lessons learnt.
Hope you can prepare better for cyber attacks.


Hactivism, hacking attacks arising from ideological conflict, is no longer a myth in Hong Kong.
There are a lot of collateral damages in cyber attacks related to hacktivism.
For example, when attackers flood the target with huge amount of network traffics, users at the network proximity of the target also suffer network performance degradation.
So users should not view themselves just as a bystander in a cyber attack, they should be more prepared for the adverse consequence of the attacks.

Most victims should not have been compromised, or the impact should have been more limited if they had applied the latest security update to their software and applied proper security defense.

Some users found their computers being utilized to launch attack, causing the network bandwidth being exhausted.
Should they have secured their system and configured their system properly, the impact would have been avoided or more limited.

Some citizens clicked on hyperlinks of DDoS attack tools and became an attacker.
They were later tracked back by law enforcement and even be legally liable.
Citizens are reminded not to attempt to participate in cyber attack which is a criminal offence.

The bright side of the story is, some victims recovered much faster than others.
They have incident response plans in place.
Some put their DNS server and web server behind security service providers and could activate the protection service to mitigate the impacts of security attacks and large volume of flooding traffics.


Here are HKCERT blog articles on the "Operation Hong Kong" cyber attack campaign:



####
document number 8: 
How I Hacked 40 Websites in 7 minutes



Last summer I started learning about information security and hacking.
Over the last year I’ve played in various wargames, capture the flag and penetration testing simulations, continuously improving my hacking skills and learning new things about ‘how to make computers deviate from their expected behavior’.

Long story short, my experience was always limited to simulated environments, and since I consider myself a white-hat hacker (aka one of the good guys) I never stuck my nose into other peoples’ businesses — quite literally.

Until now.
This will be a detailed story about how I hacked into a server which hosted 40 (this is an exact number) websites and my findings.

Note: Some prerequisite CS knowledge is needed to follow through the technical parts of the article.


A friend messaged me that an XSS vulnerability was found in his website and that he wants me to take a further look.
This is an important stage, as I am inclined to ask for him to formally express that I have his permission to perform a full test on his web application and on the server hosting it.
The answer was positive.


In the rest of the post I’ll be refering to my friend’s site as http://example.com


The first move is always to enumerate and find as much information as you can about your enemy — while trying to alarm them as little as possible.

At this stage we trigger our timer and start scanning.

$ nmap --top-ports 1000 -T4 -sC http://example.comNmap scan report for example.com {redacted}Host is up (0.077s latency).rDNS record for {redacted}: {redacted}Not shown: 972 filtered portsPORT STATE SERVICE21/tcp open ftp22/tcp open ssh| ssh-hostkey: | {redacted}80/tcp open http| http-methods: |_ Potentially risky methods: TRACE|_http-title: Victim Site139/tcp open netbios-ssn443/tcp open https| http-methods: |_ Potentially risky methods: TRACE|_http-title: Site doesn't have a title (text/html; charset=UTF-8).
|_{redacted}445/tcp open microsoft-ds5901/tcp open vnc-1| vnc-info: | Protocol version: 3.8| Security types: |_ VNC Authentication (2)8080/tcp open http-proxy|_http-title: 400 Bad Request8081/tcp open blackice-icecap

The scan completed in about 2 minutes.


That’s a lot of open ports!
By observing that the FTP (port 21) and SMB (ports 139/445) ports are open we can guess that the server is used for file hosting and for file sharing, along with it being a webserver (ports 80/443 and proxies at 8080/8081).

From The Art of War.
Enumerating is key.


Doing a UDP port scan and scanning more than the top 1000 ports would be considered if the above scan’s information was not enough.
The only port we are allowed to interact with (without credentials) is port 80/443.

Without wasting any time, I launch

gobuster

to enumerate for any interesting files on the webserver while I’ll be digging for information manually.

Turns out the /admin path was an "admin tool" which allowed authenticated users to modify stuff on the webserver.
It required credentials and since we have neither a username nor a password we move on.
(spoiler: gobuster did not find anything of value)

So far we are about 3 minutes in.
Nothing useful, yet.


Browsing to the website we see that it asks us to login.
No problem, we create an account with a dummy e-mail, click the confirmation e-mail and log-in after few seconds.

The website welcomes us and prompts us to navigate to our profile and update our profile picture.
How kind.

Seeing that the website looks custom built, I am inclined to test for an Unrestricted File Upload vulnerability.
On my terminal I execute:

I try uploading the "image", and bingo!
The uploader allows the

exploit.php

file to get uploaded.
Of course it has no thumbnail, but that means my file got uploaded somewhere.

Get the exploit’s location


Here we would expect that the uploader does some sort of processing on the uploaded file, checks its file extension and replaces with the accepted file extension like .jpeg, .jpg in order to avoid remote code execution by an attacker uploading malicious code, like yours truly.

People care about security after all.

right?
Right?
…RIGHT?

So it seems we have our webshell ready and functioning:


Seeing that the webserver runs perl scripts (really, perl?)
we grab a perl reverse shell from our favorite cheatsheet, set the IP/Port and we are rewarded with a low-privileged shell — sorry, no screenshot.

~5 minutes in the assessment, and we already have a low-privilege shell.


To my huge surprise, the server was not hosting only 1 website, but 40 different ones.
Sadly I haven’t kept screenshots of every single detail but the output was along the lines of:

You get the point.
Surprisingly, read access to ALL the hosted websites was available, which meant I could read all the sites’ backend code.
I limited myself to example.com’s code.

Notably, inside the

cgi-admin/pages

directory, all the perl scripts were connecting to a mysql database as root.
The credentials for the database were there in cleartext.
Let these be

root:pwned42


Sure enough, the server was running MariaDB and I had to resort to this issue before being able to access the database.
Afterwards we execute:

And we’re in the database with root privileges.

"use databasename;" allows us to access any of the 35 databases and view modify their contents


After just 7 minutes, we have full read/write access to the contents of 35(!)
databases


Here I am morally obligated to stop, and disclose my findings so far.
The potential damage is already huge.

What an attacker could do:


Dump the contents of all the databases, as described here, resulting in the data of all 35 companies to be leaked in the public domain.

Drop all the databases, effectively deleting the data of the 35 compaines

Leave a backdoor for persistent access as apache with a cronjob, as described here, in case they want a return trip.


I should note here that the mysql process was running as root so I figured I’d try executing

\!
whoami

in hopes of getting root.
Unfortunately I was still apache.

Time to take a break.
Stop the timer.


What can further go wrong?


After disclosing my findings, I get further permission to dig deeper.

Before looking in ways to escalate my privileges to root and be able to cause massive potential damage, I was looking at what other interesting files I could read with my limited user.

At that point, I remembered about the open SMB ports.
That meant that there should be some folder somewhere that is being shared in the system among users.
After a little enumeration, the following appears at the directory

/home/samba/secured

(please excuse me for the mass censorship):


Inside all of these directories, there were files of each user of the hosting company.
That included all kinds of sensitive data, amongst others:

.psd/.ai files (Designers know how important it is to keep these private, it is their work and their techniques after all)

Cookie sqlite files

Invoices

Pirated e-books (chuckled when I saw this)

Credentials to their WiFi SSIDS


What an attacker could do:


Camp outside the company’s offices, login to their intranet and perform all kinds of fun attacks you can do on local networks

Dump all the sensitive data listed above to the public domain


It took some time to go through the folders and realize how serious this issue is.One more break.

The final blow


After looking around for a little longer as

apache

I decide it is time to go for the big fish, alas get root access.
I refer to a popular cheatsheet and start enumerating the system for interesting files.

Due to my digging so far I had already gone through most of these techniques already and did not seem to be able to find something that would increase my foothold.

That’s when it hit me.
In the Capture the Flag challenges that I am used to playing, the operating system is usually patched and it is some intentionally misconfigured service that eventually gives you the sought-after root privilege.
In the real world however, people do not patch.

I mean, look at Equifax

(couldn’t resist).


What kind of Linux is the server running?

What version is the kernel?

This looks like an old Kernel version.

Does this remind you of something?
If not, have a read here (hint: it is VERY serious)


I found this blogpost which pointed me to test if the Kernel was vulnerable with the script found here.

Timestamps Firefox restored sites redacted


Followed by:

Game over.


I instantly wrote an e-mail fully disclosing the details and potential impact of every step as described above, and wrapped the night.
Whew.

What an attacker could do:


Read/modify ALL files on the server

Leave a persistent backdoor (as done with apache)

Install and potentially spread malware into the server’s intranet

Install ransomware (taking the databases of 35 companies and all the hosting company’s data hostage is no small thing)

Use the server as a cryptocurrency miner

Use the server as a proxy

Use the server as a C2C server

Use the server as a part of a botnet

… (use your imagination)

rm -rf / (not even joking)


The next day, I got contacted by my friend (who came in contact with the company operating the server) and was informed that the bug in the file uploader was fixed.

tl;dr


Summarizing,we found:

A web application with an Unrestricted File Upload vulnerability, which led into a low privilege shell.

Credentials to mysql database, which led to read/write access to 35 databases

Lots of readable sensitive files


Finally, we abused an unpatched kernel to obtain root access.

Mitigations — Suggestions


Let’s start by the uploader which gave us our inital foothold.
Since the whole web application’s backend was written in perl — and as I do not speak perl — I cannot really suggest fixes on that.

One fix I would suggest would be not to use perl in 2017 but that is just my opinion, feel free to prove me wrong.

Regarding the filesystem, I recommend taking great care in assigning proper file permissions for users, according to the principle of least privilege.
That way, even if a low privileged user like apache gets access, they are not able to read any sensitive files.

Running all websites in the same server is a bad idea, I’m not sure if a dockerized approach would solve the issue.

Having the same credentials for all databases is for sure a bad idea.

Single points of failure are generally not good to have.


Finally, PATCH EVERYTHING.
It’s literally 1 command:

su -c 'yum update'

(CentOS specific)

Thanks for reading and for making it until here, sorry for the long post.
I wanted to be thorough, this was one serious situation 😄


Smash that clap button 50 times if you liked it!


Shameless plug



I am a 5th year Electrical Computer Engineering student from Greece.
I am interested in infosec, blockchain research applications in modern businesses, and autonomous vehicles.
Learn more about what I do at gakonst.com

If you liked the content of this post and want to be updated about my work, follow me on Medium and on Twitter



####
document number 9: 
Hackers Learned "Do-It-Yourself"


If there's an open window, a crook will climb in.
If there's a crack in a network's operations, a hacker will slip through it and find a way to do damage.

Individuals and business need to learn that hackers are always on the prowl, but large organizations are at greater risk because they have more to lose—and hackers know it.
A major data breach in 2014 proved that companies are making serious mistakes when they don't make network safety a top, corporate-wide priority.

That's the lesson The Home Depot learned...the hard way.
Because in April 2014, hackers found their way into Home Depot's security systems, and in the process, pulled off the biggest retail credit card breach in U.S. history.

The hackers compromised (meaning they got access to) 56 million Home Depot credit card customers.
They also stole 53 million customer email addresses.

What The Home Depot learned, as did everyone else, was that network security needs to be in place not just at obvious entry points for hackers, but also throughout the entire system.
Examining the safeguards that had been in place prior to the attack, here's what Home Depot concluded:


Home Depot had taken too long over the previous few years to increase its security.


They had spent more time and money on detecting security breaches instead of anticipating where hackers might attack.


Even a chief executive who left Target in October of 2014 said, "Data security just wasn't high enough in our mission statement."



You might think that the email address theft isn't so serious, but what it does is provide hackers email access to shoppers with active accounts.
A hacker can use the information to send deceptive email messages to Home Depot customers with the hope of tricking some of them into giving away vital information, such as their Social Security numbers.

And the only thing that Home Depot really did about the email theft was to tell customers to "be on guard" for phishing attempts.
You have to wonder if Home Depot customers would like to reply to the retail giant, "Be on guard for hackers!"

Hackers learn "do-it-yourself."


According to Home Depot's own investigation, the hackers got into their systems in a unique way...and in a way they hadn't expected: The hackers infiltrated the system indirectly—they stole a password from a Home Depot vendor, a company that Home Depot works with.

That's the same thing that happened to Target stores.
Hackers busted into Target's systems by first sneaking through a back door, when they hacked into the account of a refrigeration company and then gained access to Target's system when the vendor submitted an invoice for payment electronically to Target.

You would think that companies with large networks (and millions of customers) would be on top of security gaps—unfortunately, that's not the case.

Through the window, and then inside.


Once the hackers got their foot in the system with the stolen password, they were like thieves at night, sneaking through vulnerable "doors," seeing what kinds of internal operations they could tinker with.
At one point, they came up against the heart of the computer operations running on Microsoft software.
The hackers found a vulnerable spot in the software and were able to gain access to the entire Home Depot operation system.
(Microsoft has since fixed the vulnerability for its customers with a software patch...but it was too late for Home Depot.)

Blending in with everyday business.


Once the hackers breached the system, they did their secret work, operating during normal business hours, stealing data, collecting data, transmitting it outside to their own computers...and erasing their steps without detection.
Amazingly, they blended right in with all the other operations.

And Home Depot, who thought they could spot a breach, was unaware of it all.

Eventually, the hacker's daily escapades led them to the data that comes from 7,500 self-checkout terminals at Home Depot (but not the cash registers run by employees).
The terminals were identified on the Home Depot computer system as "payment terminals"—which told the hackers they'd found something worthwhile.

Along the way, the hackers were installing malware—malicious software—that went undetected and then waited for an opportunity.
It worked, and they were able table to steal credit card numbers right from the self-checkout terminals.

We've been hacked!


The whole hacking episode was discovered only when Home Depot found out (along with others) that some suspicious credit account numbers were up for sale on an online forum for hackers Labor Day weekend, 2014.

Here's the ironic part:


Before the attack, Home Depot had gone through several years of what they thought were significant security updates.
In reflection, all of their moves were technologically behind the hackers' capabilities.


About the time (in April) that hackers first busted through, Home Depot was launching a project to boost security at their payment terminals to offset hackers—but the project moved at a slow pace and wasn't finished in time.


Also in April, as the hackers were frolicking inside and outside of Home Depot operations, Home Depot, totally unaware of what was happening, was putting together a book related to IT matters.
It was a comprehensive 50-page internal document on how to respond to a hack.



If there's a lesson for all of us, it's this: We need to be careful with all of our personal and financial information, because the companies and security experts we think are taking care of us are better at detecting what went wrong than they are at preventing it.



####
document number 10: 
Mariposa Botnet Author, Darkcode Crime Forum Admin Arrested in Germany


Phirst!

Hope they throw the book at this dude.


Great story!
I wondered what had happened to these bad actors.
It never ceases to amaze me when you look at how "professional" their websites and marketing appear.
I’m sure many KOS readers wonder why they don’t just switch to legitimate businesses; after all the demand is there, and no one would be looking for them anymore.

I know – I’m the naive optimist.


I think there are some kinds of people that would rather "beat the system" than "make the system."
People will do things for "workouts" that they won’t want to do for "work."


Easy.

There’s more money with no delays or bills in doing things the blackhat way.

I own a legitimate Consulting / PenTest firm, and it’s sickening how much more a Blackhat can make per engagement.
You *need* my business and others like me, but don’t want to pay a quarter of what it will cost when you’re attacked.

I’d never go blackhat, as I enjoy my freedom, but when I can click "Go" on a phishing/mining campaign, do nothing, and sit back and watch the $ roll in….


I know a lot of people may disagree with you, but that’s the sad reality.
I hear the same questions asked about bug bounties.
"Why aren’t more blackhats doing bug bounties?"
Same answer you gave.
They get way more money breaching a company and selling personal information on the dark web rather than (i) reporting a bug, (ii) waiting for the client to respond, (iii) having them validate if it’s a legitimate bug or not, (iv) probably have the client say that it doesn’t affect them, (v) maybe have a little back and forth to prove its legitimacy, (vi) then you’re either getting a small bounty in reference to the amount of work you put in, or the client could just close out the report as Not Applicable.

The first bug I found was when I still had no idea how the platforms worked.
It was an information disclosure bug that was a result from a leftover endpoint they forgot to remove in their application.
That particular company didn’t offer bounties, but I’ve often wondered how much I could have gotten for that bug had the company provided a bounty–or had it been put on the dark web.
Which, like you, I enjoy my freedom too much to do something so stupid.


I’m not that much of an online reader to be honest but your site is really nice, I’ll go ahead and bookmark your site to come back later on.
Thanks for sharing this post.


Spammer


"Fubar" – When you get arrested by your own government and then extradited to the United States for prosecution


Oh, I remember ‘Mariposa’.

Those botnets made it so easy for attackers to compromise the victims’ networks; while it costs the victims so much money to protect themselves from such threats.

The world has not been the same since…

BTW, Thanks for this update Brian!


Anyone believing that Iserdo had nothing to do with the NiceHash hack of 62M of BTC while he was serving as the CTO is living in a dream world.


That would be nice hash they are smoking!


Well, when you hire a criminal as your CTO, what could possibly go wrong?


Book ’em, Danno!


Two interesting takedowns within a week in Germany?
I wonder if authorities have a new tool up their sleeve, like a compromise of TOR or some such thing.
Regardless, everybody that has an ethernet connection should know that there is no such thing as anonymity in reality.
Signals come and go from known physical addresses, somebody just has to make the effort to connect the dots.
Just as one can make it computationally intensive to rip a password hash, but one can’t make it impossible to do when the resources are basically limitless.

A thought to the wiseguys: The fly that keeps landing on your forehead in a room full of flies is usually the one that gets swatted first…


When I saw the name fubar, I immediately thought of foonet for some reason.

Talk about a blast from the past…..


Here’s the "problem": Iserdo has been already convicted for the crime and it is unconstitutional to be tried two times for the same crime… So will the prosecutors break their own laws in order to get the conviction?


finally germans are using the bunkers again for something good and now this.. sad!
send anthrax to the US, not prisoners.


3 ++


"On or about December 5, 2013" appears a lot in the indictment.
The indictment was filed December 4th, 2018, one day before the statute of limitations on things like wire fraud (5 years).
I wonder why they waited so long?


Waiting for the last minute, reveals a weak case.
It’s likely that prosecutors know they’ll never be able to convict on evidence, but feel it’s important to send a political message that they can still inflict punishment.

And that punishment is this process: Legal fees, being held for extradition, constant searches of your body, imprisonment while awaiting bail, separation from friends and family, hearings, and more.

If they actually had a strong case, they would’ve nabbed him as he left his Slovenian prison cell a few years ago.

Still, the political message will likely compel other defendants to plead guilty, rather than deal with the same pile of poo.
And some career DOJ employees might get a promotion for this abuse of power.

—

P.S. to Stephen (2 comments above yours), completely different jurisdictions involved, so it’s not double jeopardy.


Lol fubar been a fed before 2013.

Funny how mafi put so much trust into him.
Everyone told him he was a fed from the jump.

All the real OG’s are still active.
The real dk is not public or known to any researchers and never will be.
The circle is under 12 and will remain.


Keep telling yourself that buddy.
Enjoy prison.


I’ve been out of the game too long.
statute of limitations.

Those of us who were smart took the blackhat money and invested it into legit online business.

I do however still keep in touch with old colleagues.

The dk raid taught those who are still at large a valuable lesson.
The ones who are still active are beyond careful at this point.
Probably a little too overcautious if you ask me.


"The real dk is not public or known to any researchers and never will be. "

Al Capone, John Gotti, Mussolini, and Richard Nixon all thought they could get away with it.
Good luck!


Sin1s there was never a user on darkode with your nick or a similar nickname before the takedown… so you’re just talking to sound cool or what?
Can you backup anything you’ve said on this article’s comments?
I doubt it, but please do prove me wrong.


ROFL.

Check the old leaked db’s.
I’m sure sinis, sinister or something similar is one one of the dumps.

Also, my handle has been changed multiple times.

Pm me you’re jabber..

Actually don’t, you’re a nobody.


Funny if they have less than 12 the forum would be useless, from what i remember they are a black market place selling malwares etc, how would they make money with 12 people when prob 4 of the are moderators lol sounds like you talking out your ass , sinister is a common "hacker" name which makes your statement invalid.


because it’s hardly a marketplace anymore.
12 is a roundabout.
there is no moderation.
those who are left are known to be trusted.
no business is being done over a site anymore – lesson learned.
"sinister is a common hacker name" – lol.
i don’t have to explain who i am.
as i mentioned before – those who were smart took the spam/ransom/whatever blackhat money and and moved it into legitimate businesses.


Skorjanc was already sentenced for that crime in Slovenia.

Article 14 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights:

"No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or acquitted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of each country."


Considering statute of limitations are up for 2 out of the 3 charges, it just seems like FBI has a little too much time on their hands.

Charge 1: Rico – 4 Year Statute Limitation (expired 2017) Charge 2: Wire/Bank Fraud – 5 Years (expired 2018) Charge 3: Identity fraud – 7 years.
(expiring 2020 or in 2 months)


Lets hope he falls out of the plane on the way to the US.


So long as the sentences for these crimes stays pathetic, they will continue to encourage more criminals.
Hell, if you get a million, spend 10 years in jail, still have the million – which is a hell of a lot more than I have after working 10 years.
It’s a wonder more IT people aren’t criminals, it pays well, the punishment is mild at worst.
And it might land you a job working for super criminals (governments) with unlimited benefits.


Still far worse than bankers who broke the world and got bailed out by tax payers


Hmmm… Crook is Slovenian?
Has passport?
Slovenian has piece of US$ 52 million?

Is now nationalist hero status here in Ljubljana!
Capitalism pay off for small countries…finally…

Is future candidate for president in most African countries, south of Sahara; or east of Ukraine.

US$ 52 million… And to think he never use gun… Smart Slovenian…

Medieval, retrograde US crooks so backward.
Use gun for US$3.19 robbery of 7-11 empire, facing 20 years for gun use.
Forget dat US$3.19…

Hope many US crooks learn from this illustrious, Slovenian exploit.
Click here for super low cost, effective Slovenian malware: me-dufus.com…


i knew fubar is such a snitch bitch

lets hope mafi will be out soon and will see his family again


How do you know mafi is in prison?
Any article links you can provide or proof to substantiate this claim?


https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/major-computer-hacking-forum-dismantled


Indicted and pled guilty.
But incarcerated?
Are you sure?

Two years after that article, Krebs was still asking:

https://twitter.com/briankrebs/status/908717858313703424


Exactly… so is there any proof mafi was ever incarcerated?
Doesn’t seem like it.
I would be super interested if there was!


Incarcerated, yes.
But only temporarily.
Mafi really isn’t that interesting.
Iserdo should have done a better job when deciding who to hand the keys to the castle.


Troll… do you have any proof mafi was ever incarcerated?
Come on, let’s see it.
Friendly advice, I would be careful making claims regarding darkode for fun…


Fun fact.
Once upon a Time me and a friend needed a webmailer, asap.
Mafi came in clutch and said he could have it done by the end of the week.
60% inbox guarantee!
Bots -> webmail -> good data.

Wanna guess how many actually hit inbox?
ROFL Mafi couldn’t code himself out of a web paper bag, the community should have never been handed to him.
This is the man who single handedly destroyed it.
The man who let "lizard squad" run a muck.
He’s a joke.


Sin1s… you do know there were 3 founding members of darkode right?
iserdo was just 1 of the 3.
He didn’t "hand off" anything to fubar.
The forum evolved long after iserdo left and fubar eventually emerged as one of several administrators.

Why so much hate on fubar anyway?
The kid is fighting for his freedom.
There were much much worse people on darkode with ties to Russian boards like mf and dcm causing millions in actual damage.


Ttoll?
Fubar is a Fed, period.
He’s always been a Fed.

Friendly advice lol.
If you had any idea what you’re talking about then I shouldn’t need to explain to you who I am.

I never said he handed anything to fubar.
Fubar is a nobody.


Its funny how the whole so called "infosec" community call this guy a criminal simply because the Government says so yet they never seen any evidence and don’t know the guy.
Simply amazing how brainwashed people as a whole are


Hi Jack.
What in particular do you think is in error in the USG’s claims and why?
Mr. Škorjanc definitely has a great deal of evidence against him already.


They clearly want him for information he can provide.
Owning nicehash he obviously has wealth of information that will be useful to U.S.
The bottom line is U.S global reach can grab anyone it needs as intelligence asset under pretext of such evidence as text messages dated back many years ago.
But this saga helps journalists like you sell stories, keep the plebs happy, career prosecutors make name for themselves, everybody win except the unfortunate victim who need to spend a fortune to defend themselves comply or go to kangaroo trial.
I don’t know this guy but reading comments on reputable blogs and twitter some saying "he must be locked up and key trowed away" and "he must be on electric chair" by people who never seen evidence, have opinion by contagion yet they call themselves researchers.
Shame!


Maybe you didn’t see the question.
Here it is again: "What in particular do you think is in error in the USG’s claims and why?"


It is impossible to understand it without being yourself or someone close to you in similar situation, so it is meaningless to explain it here.
Let me tell you a short story of a situation similar to this: imagine you are someone from a third country talking to random people on internet, and you talk with a "target" about hacking, malware etc curiosity.
Now the U.S gov can, based on simply that message indict you and extradite you, for only writing text messages, no hacking, no stealing.
Now this guy spent around a year in U.S jail and after they threaten to jail him for 30 years, they ask him to plead guilty just for "good public opinion" so people will think the Government is doing their job.
Then on news it appears that he admitted guilt and was sent back to his country.
This is real story and that is why i don’t believe anything i read on news.
Its just like fake news, we can never really know the truth.
People are forced to admit guilt even if they didn’t do anything illegal, just to go home to their families.
I would not be surprised if this darkode guy story is similar


relationship


relationship


Vizit this website canva



####
document number 11: 
Here's How Donald Trump Ended Up Referencing A Russian-Promoted 4chan Conspiracy Theory In His Call To The Ukrainian President






Saul Loeb / AFP / Getty Images

US President Donald Trump and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky meet in New York on Sept.
25 on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly.


The White House released the record of a call between President Donald Trump and Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelensky on Wednesday.
According to the document, Trump asked Zelensky to do him a "favor" and investigate the origins of the Russia probe as well as former vice president Joe Biden.

As the country’s mainstream media swarmed over the staff-written memorandum of the conversation, anonymous radicalized communities like 4chan and far-right pockets of Facebook, Reddit, and Telegram focused on something else.
It wasn’t the possible abuse of power that sent them into a fervor, but instead the American president’s mention of CrowdStrike, a company that provides security, threat intelligence, and cyberattack response services, and which the Democratic National Committee hired to investigate the hack of its servers during the 2016 election campaign.

In the memorandum, Trump says to Zelensky, "I would like you to find out what happened with this whole situation with Ukraine, they say CrowdStrike… I guess you have one of your wealthy people… The server, they say Ukraine has it."

One large 4chan thread was titled "HAPPENING: CROWDSTRIKE SERVER RELEASE IMMINENT," another, "What is CrowdStrike, and why does their server seem to be important?"
and another, "ULTIMATE HAPPENING: Trump mentions CROWDSTRIKE in Transcript release, Tied to DNC server Seth Rich."

CrowdStrike's role in a sprawling conspiracy carried out by the DNC started as wild conjecture on anonymous message boards in the lead up to the 2016 election.
The flames were fanned by Russian news outlets like Russia Today and Sputnik News, who both published multiple pieces about it.
It was then laundered into mainstream Republican discourse by figures like Roger Stone, Trump's former campaign adviser.

In a statement provided to BuzzFeed News, a CrowdStrike spokesperson pushed back at conspiracy theories about CrowdStrike’s work with the DNC in 2016.
"We provided all forensic evidence and analysis to the FBI," the CrowdStrike spokesperson said.
"As we’ve stated before, we stand by our findings and conclusions that have been fully supported by the US Intelligence community."






Supplied


For Trump’s online fanbase, for CrowdStrike to make its way into the president’s conversation with a foreign leader — and to be subject of mainstream news articles (like the one you’re reading right now) — is vindication of a yearslong conspiracy theory.
Here’s how CrowdStrike bubbled up from the online sludge and into the mouth of the American president — and may become part of the impeachment investigations.

In 2016, the Democratic National Committee hired CrowdStrike, which is based in Sunnyvale, California, to investigate a breach into their servers.
The cybersecurity firm concluded that Russian government–backed hackers compromised the network, rejecting the idea that the hack was instead carried out by a lone wolf hacker named "Guccifer 2.0."

CrowdStrike outlined their initial findings in a June 2016 blog post: "We observed the two Russian espionage groups compromise the same systems and engage separately in the theft of identical credentials."

But the minute CrowdStrike released that conclusion — a full report came in December 2016 — they became a character in a sprawling online conspiracy, which sought to debunk the Russians' involvement.
After BuzzFeed News reported on the findings, hyperpartisan website Breitbart raised concerns, based on CrowdStrike’s financial ties with Google.

That planted the seeds of doubt.

The most commonly used 4chan archive, 4plebs, which doesn’t include everything due to threads 404ing and disappearing, lists March 2017 as the earliest mention of CrowdStrike on the site.

"How did /pol/ spin the whole Trump under FBI investigation and the FBI and DoJ saying that Obama didn't wiretap Trump," one user asks.

Another user responds with a timeline titled "Russia could not have been the source of leaked Democrat emails released by Wikileaks.
Please read."
The user writes, "[The DNC’s] entire narrative around Russia has been fictionalized with the help of the CrowdStrike private cybersecurity company."

4chan

One of the earlier 4chan threads to mention CrowdStrike.


Most likely this reference is to two more Breitbart articles that came out that same week painting CrowdStrike as a part of a DNC conspiracy to spread their own conspiracy about the Trump campaign colluding with the Russian government.

Less than a week later, according to a Google search, people on the pro-Trump subreddit The_Donald mention CrowdStrike for the first time.
A user writes, "CrowdStrike did the DNC hacking report that's starting to unravel…," and links to a blog post on a financial site called iBankCoin.
iBankCoin mentions the Breitbart reporting on CrowdStrike and then goes a step further to pull in false rumors that the firm had ties to the think tank the Atlantic Council, a common boogeyman for the far right.

This is also why so many in the far right believe CrowdStrike is Ukrainian-owned.
The firm’s cofounder and CTO Dmitri Alperovitch has worked with the Atlantic Council.
Victor Pinchuk, a Ukrainian oligarch and another long-standing 4chan boogeyman, is on the Atlantic Council’s International Advisory Board.
Like a game of telephone, it seems like the fact that Alperovitch is a Russian American and Pinchuk is Ukrainian mutated together into one false theory that CrowdStrike is an anti-Russian operation run out of Ukraine.

It wasn’t until May 2017 that the threads of this online conspiracy connected around the death of DNC staffer Seth Rich.
The Russian Embassy in the UK tweeted about it.
Fox News reported that Rich "had leaked thousands of internal emails to WikiLeaks," citing a "federal investigator."

Bringing the whole thing together was a Reddit thread on The_Donald about Rich’s death that same month titled "BREAKING: I've found evidence that the DNC fabricated the Russian conspiracy all the way in June 2016, and that Seth Rich may have died to cover it up.
Long but worth it!"
It includes CrowdStrike as a major player in the DNC’s supposed inside job conspiracy.

According to 4plebs, the 4chan community excitedly talked about the conspiracy theory all summer.
CrowdStrike and their supposed ties to the Atlantic Council appear in an April thread about conspiracy theories of child trafficking by Democratic leaders, in a September thread about former Hillary Clinton campaign chair John Podesta’s emails, and in a November thread about a Daily Caller story about Rep.
Debbie Wasserman Schultz, the former head of the DNC, not telling employees about the server breach.

Even Trump seemed to have picked up on some of the chatter around CrowdStrike by then.
In April 2017, Trump, in an interview with the AP, says, "Why wouldn’t Podesta and Hillary Clinton allow the FBI to see the server?
They brought in another company that I hear is Ukrainian-based."

"CrowdStrike," the AP reporter asks.

"That’s what I heard.
I heard it’s owned by a very rich Ukrainian, that’s what I heard.
But they brought in another company to investigate the server," Trump replies.
"Why didn’t they allow the FBI in to investigate the server?"

QAlerts


In his answer, Trump swirls together a bunch of rumors about CrowdStrike into one mass.
He also seems to think that it’s just one physical server that actually went missing and not 140 cloud-based servers that were decommissioned in 2016.

All of these disparate elements did finally came together on Oct.
28, 2017, with the first QAnon post.
QAnon is like the final evolution of all the far-right pro-Trump online conspiracy movements.
The nonsensical evidence-free mega-conspiracy theory was finally something vague enough to incorporate every bit of violent and paranoid fan fiction communities like 4chan and Reddit had been crowdsourcing since 2014.
It pulled in Seth Rich’s death, the Democrat-led global pedophile ring from Pizzagate, the DNC inside job conspiracy, and, in December 2017, it pulled in CrowdStrike, as well.

According to the Q-tracking website QAlerts, CrowdStrike appeared in an update in December 2017.
QAnon posts are written in borderline nonsense jargon, closer to reading tea leaves than coherent posts, but according to QAlerts, the cybersecurity firm appeared in 10 updates, one as recent as October 2018.

Imagining President Trump on 4chan or Reddit is ridiculous, but he has frequently interacted with QAnon supporters both on Twitter and in real life.
He has tweeted about the Deep State.
There have also been several instances of ideas crawling out of the far-right internet swamps onto Trump’s phone.

4chan



####
document number 12: 
How I Learned What I Know About Candidate Sourcing



When it comes to my theories and best practices for leveraging information systems for quickly finding highly qualified candidates, I am often asked, "So, how did you figure all of this stuff out?"

It’s a fantastic question, and I am happy to be asked it, but my answer doesn’t seem to satisfy anyone.

The short answer is literally that "I just figured it out."

The long answer provides some insight into how I figured some of this candidate search stuff out, but I think the real value and message of my personal story is that anyone can become quite proficient at electronic talent discovery – and it’s less dependent on any training you receive and more on how you approach your job.

When people ask me how I’ve managed to "figure out" all of this candidate search stuff, it seems they want to hear that I went through some specific training program, that I read a certain book, that I worked under some sourcing guru or something similar.

The reality is I’ve never worked under any sourcing guru, I’ve never attended any sourcing training classes, and I didn’t read any books on candidate sourcing.
FAR from it.

In fact, when I started in the recruiting industry at a small, privately held staffing agency in Northern Virginia in January 1997, I received very little recruiting training, let alone any specialized training on how to find candidates.
I was shown a Lotus Notes-based C-PAS resume database and told "this is where you find candidates."

It is important to know that I did not enter the staffing industry with any prior experience or advantages that would help me in leveraging information systems to identify talent.
When I started in recruiting, I did not own a computer.
I graduated college with a B.A. in Psychology, not "even" a B.S., let alone a technical degree like Computer Science or Information Systems.
Although I was told that the company’s C-PAS database supported Boolean search, I did not know what Boolean search was.

Not only did I not know what Boolean search was – I did not know you could find resumes on the Internet.
I did not know about AltaVista, and Google did not exist yet.

In 1997, my company did not use any job boards – I did not know Monster existed (or OCC, for that matter – for those who recall where Monster got their search interface from).

My company’s main source of candidates came from people responding to newspaper classified ads who faxed their resumes in, which were subsequently scanned into the C-PAS database, and from resumes collected from job fairs which were also scanned in.
I believe that the resume database had about 70,000 records or so when I started with the company.

My Training


My "training" (picture me using air quotes for emphasis) consisted of someone showing me how to navigate C-PAS, telling me about the AND and OR Boolean operators (nothing about NOT), and being told that you could find candidates in C-PAS by entering in keywords from job descriptions.
There certainly wasn’t any "formal" training – I think this was all explained to me in about 20 minutes.

Yes, I am serious.

I was never trained on cold calling/phone sourcing – it never even occurred to me to try to call into a company to find people.
Our database was how we found candidates, and how any recruiter at any other company found their candidates, for all I knew.

How I Learned Boolean Search


Absent of any real training and lacking a mentor, I essentially learned the art and science of leveraging Boolean search strings to find candidates the hard way – through trial and error.

"Trial and error" is really common language for the scientific method– investigating, acquiring new knowledge, and correcting and integrating previous knowledge.
According to Wikipedia, "To be termed scientific, a method of inquiry must be based on gathering observable, empirical and measurable evidence subject to specific principles of reasoning.
A scientific method consists of the collection of data through observation and experimentation, and the formulation and testing of hypotheses."

Although I did not know it at the time, and I certainly wouldn’t have told anyone that I was learning my job through the scientific method, this is pretty much what I was actually doing.
If something I was trying to do didn’t work – I didn’t have anyone else to go to for answers – so I had to get creative, experiment, and keeping hacking at it until I finally found a way that worked and got me the results I needed.
This is a horribly painful and frustrating process, but I have since learned that it’s actually a very effective method of learning.

For example, if I needed a QA Test Engineer with experience testing applications developed in VB, I’d throw all of the search terms from the job description and required skills in and run with it.
Once I exhausted those results, if I didn’t have the candidates I needed, failing to cover the position I was assigned was not an option – I had to find another way.
So I’d try something else (i.e., experiment and test a hypothesis) – like wonder if every QA Test Engineer who has experience testing applications written in VB would actually mention VB in their resume…and I would then use AND NOT (VB or "Visual Basic") to target those people and start calling QA Test Engineers who didn’t mention VB in their resume and simply ask them what languages the applications they have experience testing had been developed in.

After 5 calls to people who did not mention VB in their resume, I found a woman who had in fact tested applications written in VB (and I subsequently placed her).
Thus I learned part 1 of what I now call the "Cardinal Rule of E-Sourcing," which states that for every search term you are thinking of using in your Boolean string, first ask yourself if everyone with that skill, experience, or title would mention it in their resume.
Because I discovered that many don’t.

I learned part 2 of the Cardinal Rule of E-Sourcing(which states that for every search term you are thinking of using in your Boolean string, consider every possible way that it can be mentioned) through simple observation.
As I reviewed my search results, I would notice terms in resumes that I did not specifically search for that seemed to mean the same thing as my search terms.
I would make note of these alternate terms and incorporate them back into my search, continuously refining and improving the searches.

My Performance


Although I am pretty good at what I do now, my career in recruiting didn’t start with any indication that I would be any better than average at finding and placing candidates.
In fact, the owner of the company told me later that he was almost sure I would fail.

I started in recruiting on January 13th, 1997, and I did not make my first placement until March – it was a financial analyst at AOL (everyone remembers their first hire, right?).

However, from April to December 1997, I placed 71 more candidates, which is an average of just about 8 hires per month, leading me to be recognized as the Recruiter of the Year, outperforming more experienced and tenured recruiters by a wide margin (the next closest recruiter had 30 fewer placements for the year).
And this was accomplished in an environment without any candidate "ownership," for those who are familiar with the agency vernacular.

I can tell you precisely how I achieved those numbers.
While I had pretty good candidate relationship development skills, good candidate closing and control, good voicemail techniques, and good matching skills (as good as any recruiter with 3-12 months of experience), I had developed the ability to use Boolean searches to quickly find large quantities of precisely matched and highly qualified candidates in direct response to client/manager needs – faster and better than most.
And, I planned every single day, without fail.

Interestingly, to this day, I find that most sourcers and recruiters do not come in each day with a call plan.
Having a daily call plan to execute first thing in the A.M. that I developed the previous afternoon from my searches was definitely one of the keys to my productivity and my success.
I eventually got to the point that if I searched for and built a call list of 20 potential candidates for a given position, I would have 2 A+ candidates submitted on the position within 24-48 hours, and typically have 1-2 backups.

For those who are interested, in my first year as an agency recruiter, I averaged over 3 external candidate submittals (candidates presented to client hiring managers) per day – my record was 14 in a single day.
Most months I would have 65-70 external submittals and over 20 interviews (some call them send outs).
As most recruiting managers/directors can attest to – it’s difficult to NOT get 6-10 hires per month from those numbers.

Based on my early performance, I was promoted to recruiting manager and then later to director of recruiting, where I focused most of my time on training and developing my recruiting staff.
Interestingly, after the privately held company I worked for was acquired by a large publicly traded staffing firm, I took a position as a "market manager" of recruiting where I was responsible for personal production as a recruiter as well as for managing a team of recruiters.
After 7 years of not "working a desk," I was able to quickly ramp up and achieve "Platinum Performer" status (top 5% firm-wide) in less than 12 months.

When I hit the phones in 2005, I did not have a network of people/candidates – I started quite literally from scratch.
I was able to quickly achieve high levels of performance based primarily on two things: #1 My ability to quickly find the right people, and #2 My daily planning.
It doesn’t get any simpler than that.

Lessons Learned


I think it’s been a huge benefit to be self taught.
By no means is the way I came to know what I know about candidate sourcing ideal, nor is it practical or scalable.
However, by having to figure everything out on my own I had no preconceived notions about sourcing, recruiting, the "right way" to do anything, or what was possible/not possible.
There was no proverbial "box."

For example:


Candidate Pipelines: I’ve literally

never

had to focus on pipelining candidates, because I’ve always been able to pretty much find whatever I needed within 24-48 hours.
Many years into my career, I would read articles about the importance of developing talent pipelines, and my response was incredulity.
I honestly could not figure out why anyone would have to identify candidates prior to having a confirmed need.
It seemed like such a waste of time and effort based on my personal experience – what happens if the needs never come?
What happens if the positions do finally come, but all of your pipelined candidates don’t match the requirements (they’re rarely exactly as forecasted), or are they are no longer available or entertaining making a change?
Later I would learn that my instincts were surprisingly accurate, at least according to the Toyota Way/Lean philosophy.
Why bother building inventories of candidates based on forecasts when you can achieve Just-In-Time recruiting?


Active/Passive Candidates: I was never told that some candidates were "active" and that others were "passive," nor was I brainwashed into thinking that "passive" candidates were always better than "active" candidates.
If anything, I learned that everyone is a candidate.
I never thought twice about calling a resume that was 1, 2, 3, or 4+ years old – in fact, some of my easiest, most frictionless placements came from people whose resume had not been updated in 4 years.
It’s a funny thing – if you find the right people and present them with the right opportunity – you can turn a non-job seeker into one.
Imagine that.
:-)


Phone Sourcing: I’ve never had to make a truly "cold" call because I’ve always been able to quickly find the candidates I need, or find the people who know the candidates I need…and to be honest, after I learned that some people rely heavily on cold-call phone sourcing to identify candidates – it never really made sense to me, because it has many intrinsic limitations when compared to searching information systems, including low control over critical candidate variables, and a low ROI.



There is No Sourcing Gene


It always bothers me when people say I have a "talent" for candidate sourcing – that all too easily "explains away" everything I have worked so very hard to figure out.

There is no gene for sourcing and recruiting.
Besides, Talent is Overrated – deliberate practice is where it’s at.
I literally come into work every day to get better at what I do.
Most people don’t – they just come into work and do what they’ve always done.
It seems like such a subtle difference, but I can assure you, it’s not.

I honestly don’t think there is anything unique about me – I am simply a product of my environment.
If I had not started in the recruiting industry in a sink-or-swim environment, or if I had more in depth training (and learned the "right" way to source/recruit) or if I had been taught that the only way to find high quality candidates was through phone sourcing and cold calling, I know for a fact that I would not have the skills or ability I have today, and you would not be reading this blog!
Looking back, I am thankful for my lack of training and for the unique opportunity that I was given – it played a big part in making me who I am today.

While there is definitely no sourcing/recruiting gene – I do have to give some credit to my personality traits (there’s that B.A. in Psychology rearing its head again).
I’m a bit of a perfectionist, I am very competitive (I hate to lose at anything), I don’t enjoy doing things unless I do them well, I really enjoy figuring things out/solving problems, and I don’t give up – I will find a way.

If I were to self-diagnose, I’d say I have an obsessive personality.
The more "PC" way to describe an obsessive personality includes "focused," "driven," "goal oriented," "never gives up," "has to be the best," etc.
I have a theory that most top performers in business or sports (or anything, for that matter) have obsessive personalities.
But that’s another post entirely.

The moral of this story is that you don’t need any special training or any particular background to become exceptional at sourcing candidates or any step in the recruiting life cycle – in fact, I’d argue that all you really need is the desire to become very good at it, and the focus and drive to put in the deliberate practice necessary to achieve your goal.
If you’re truly committed and dedicated to mastering a thing, you will, or you’ll come close trying.



####
document number 13: 
An Ohio judge determined to hold a trial, a defendant removed from the courtroom with coronavirus symptoms illustrate perils of pandemic-era trials


A screenshot shows jury selection on April 28, 2020 in Ashland County Common Pleas Court Judge Ronald Forsthoefel's courtroom.


CLEVELAND, Ohio — An Ohio judge who insisted on holding what legal experts believe was the nation’s first trial under coronavirus stay-at-home orders agreed on Wednesday to postpone the case, a day after the defendant was rushed from the courthouse to the hospital with COVID-19-like symptoms.

Ashland County Common Pleas Court Judge Ronald Forsthoefel pushed to start the trial on Tuesday and forced defense attorney Adam Stone to violate a doctor’s recommendation to self-quarantine after he came into contact with another client who tested positive for the virus.
Forsthoefel wanted to continue the trial Wednesday morning, Stone said in an interview.

The defendant, Seth Whited, was released from the hospital Tuesday after a COVID-19 test came back negative.
The doctor ordered him to self-quarantine and monitor his symptoms for six days in case the test was a false-negative, Stone said.
Forsthoefel ordered both Stone and Whited to break the self-quarantine recommendations and come back into the courthouse Wednesday morning, Stone said.

"There was a lively discussion between myself and the judge," Stone said.
"Ultimately, with the prosecutor joining in, we agreed that it was appropriate to continue the case."

Video of Wednesday’s proceedings posted on the court’s website showed Forsthoefel, wearing a black face mask to match his black robe, took the bench shortly after 9 a.m. Wednesday to tell the potential jurors that he would postpone the trial until May 12.

"Some people are more concerned about this and their exposure to the virus than others.
And those viewpoints are all over the place," Forsthoefel said from the bench.
"I count myself as an old person these days.
Some of us older folks are probably less concerned than some of the younger folks.
But I don’t know, that’s not a real true, across-the-board statement either."

Leaders of criminal defense groups on Wednesday denounced the judge’s multiple refusals to delay the trial, despite the Ashland County Prosecutor’s Office saying it had no objection to a delay.
Stone presented the court on Tuesday with a doctor’s weekend recommendation for him to self-quarantine because he had contact with an inmate at Mansfield Correctional Institution who had later tested positive for COVID-19 as an asymptomatic carrier.

The Ohio Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers said in a statement that Forsthoefel "took an unnecessary risk by forcing a jury to assemble for a non-essential trial" and "endangered the health of everyone in the courtroom and threatened the defendant’s right to a fair trial."

Nina Ginsberg, president of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, said her group believes Forsthoefel is the first judge around the country to try to hold a jury trial since states imposed stay-at-home orders.

"We’ve been expecting this to happen, but I didn’t expect it to happen so soon," Ginsberg said.
"I didn’t think we’d see judges trying to force jury trials while most of the country is still under stay-at-home orders."

Forsthoefel, one of two elected judges in this largely rural county of about 50,000 people an hour southwest of Cleveland, declined through the court’s administrator Tina Carpenter to comment to cleveland.com on his decisions to move the trial forward and the court’s efforts to install safety measures.

Carpenter said she did not know that Forsthoefel was likely the first judge to try to hold a jury trial since shut-down orders swept the country in March.
She said she thought it was unfair for groups to criticize the judge for attempting to push forward with the trial.

"We’re coming to work every day, business as usual," Carpenter told cleveland.com.
"Then all of a sudden, your court is being talked about."

Judge’s refusals

Whited is charged with endangering children, a third-degree felony, and low-level felonies and misdemeanors that accuse him of hacking into the computer and email accounts of his ex-girlfriend, according to court records.
He is free on bond and has waived his right to a speedy trial, and Forsthoefel granted three previous motions to postpone the trial, resulting in a Tuesday trial date.

Stone, on April 7, filed a motion to postpone the trial again, citing the spread of the coronavirus.
Assistant prosecutor Victor Perez filed a motion the same day, saying his office did not object.

Forsthoefel denied the motion the following day, writing in his order that Whited should plead guilty, or prosecutors should dismiss the indictment if the sides did not want to go trial.

"If it’s not possible to find a resolution acceptable to the State, the Victim and the Defendant during the 11 months this case has been pending, then this case in (sic) should be tried before other conflicts for witnesses and parties arise during the summer months, or the indictment should be dismissed," the judge wrote.

Stone filed an emergency motion asking the Ohio Supreme Court to step in and stop the trial.
The court’s justices on Monday voted 6-1 to allow the trial to proceed.
Chief Justice Maureen O’Connor wrote in the majority opinion that the trial could only proceed if the court refused entry to anyone who showed COVID-19 symptoms or had a temperature of 100 degrees or higher.
The Supreme Court also ordered Forsthoefel to excuse any potential juror who expressed concern about participating in the trial.
Justice Michael Donnelly, a former Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court judge, cast the lone dissenting vote.

Hours after the denial, Stone filed a motion asking Forsthoefel to reconsider his decision to hold the trial.
The motion said that Stone learned over the weekend that another client of his who is inside the Mansfield Correctional Facility tested positive for the virus, and Stone’s doctor recommended he self-quarantine at home for 14 days to monitor his symptoms and avoid potentially spreading it to others.

Stone said he provided the court on Tuesday morning with a copy of his doctor’s recommendation.
Forsthoefel again refused to postpone the trial.

Trial derails

Jury selection began Tuesday morning with several measures in place.

Forsthoefel closed the courthouse to the public and live-streamed the trial to ensure public access.
The judge also split the jury pool into two groups to conduct jury selection in two sessions of fewer than 15 jurors.
The court made potential jurors sit in the back of the courtroom instead of the jury box so they could sit six feet apart, moving the witness stand to the center of the courtroom floor and ordering court staff to sanitize the courtroom multiple times a day.

Many jurors wore masks, but not all did, and the court did not have enough to provide one for each juror.

Stone said during the proceedings, he noticed Whited, who was wearing a surgical mask, started to cry.
Whited’s face was red and he was sweating, Stone said.
They stopped the proceedings, and Stone and his paralegal took Whited into the court’s law library, where medical staff took his temperature and found he had a low-grade fever, Stone said.

Paramedics then placed Whited on a stretcher and carried him out of the courthouse, in the presence of some of the potential jurors who gathered in the hallway, Stone said.

Whited was hospitalized for several hours and his COVID-19 test came back negative, Stone said.
Still, doctors ordered him to self-quarantine for six days to monitor his symptoms, Stone said.

Stone said that when Forsthoefel ordered Whited to come back to the courthouse on Wednesday morning to resume jury selection, Stone told him to sit in his car in the parking lot.
Stone objected to Whited coming into the building, but acquiesced when Forsthoefel ordered him to get his client, he said.

Stone enlisted the help of the Ohio Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers’ Strike Force, a group that sends lawyers to represent lawyers.
Attorneys Ian Friedman, Mark DeVan and Daniel Sabol to the courthouse on Wednesday morning after Stone said he would refuse to proceed with the trial and prepared to be held in contempt of court if Forsthoefel ordered it to continue.

Forsthoefel backed down and called off the trial.
He told the potential jurors on Wednesday that the court was in jeopardy of not having enough jurors to field a 12-member jury with two alternate jurors, and mentioned the previous day’s events "which were a little out of the ordinary."

"It’s been an unusual experience for all of us," Forsthoefel said.
"We’re trying to figure out how to do this as things move forward."

Stone still stressed that Forsthoefel went to great lengths to implement as many precautions as possible in order to hold the trial.

"He took as strong of measures as you could ask a judge to take under these circumstances," Stone said.
"I just do not believe that under the current environment with the social distancing requirements, that we’re in a position as defense attorneys to go forward on these jury trials."

Groups decry judge

The trial has drawn the attention of legal observers around the country as a potential bellwether to show how trials could, or could not, go forward in the COVID-19 age.

Friedman, also the president of the Cuyahoga Metropolitan Bar Association, said in an interview that his organization watched the live-stream of the trial and noted several troubling things that show it’s nearly impossible to hold a jury trial that both adheres to coronavirus-related public health measures and protects a defendant’s constitutional rights.

Defense attorneys and private investigators will have a hard time tracking down witnesses and interviewing them to get statements, he said.

Orders to remain six feet apart and wear masks make it nearly impossible for lawyers to communicate in confidence with their client while a witness is testifying, Friedman said.
Jurors will have a harder time gauging witnesses’ and defendants’ facial expressions during testimony if they have to sit in the back of the courtroom, and will not be able to do so at all if witnesses and defendants wear masks over their face, Friedman said.

Even approaching witnesses with documents will be difficult, Friedman said.

Ginsberg said potential jurors might feel pressure during jury selection to say that they are not concerned, or give in to a judge’s assurances that the court was taking precautions to ensure the courtroom was safe, while secretly being afraid of contracting the virus.
The result could be a desire to rush through deliberations to return home, Ginsberg said.

Friedman said he saw that play out on Wednesday.
He said he overheard potential jurors who had said during Tuesday’s jury selection that they would have no problem serving on the jury during the coronavirus expressing concern in the hallway.

The courts’ remedies to allay the fears of potential jurors by excusing those in at-risk categories could also result in a jury that does not truly represent the defendant’s peers, Friedman said.

"People’s well being and right to a fair trial cannot be outweighed merely by a court’s concern for expediency," Friedman said.

Ashland County Prosecutor Christopher Tunnell said he felt like the trial would have been able to go on successfully "with any other defendant."

"Absent the defendant having whatever episode that was, we’d still be in trial," Tunnell said.

Tunnell did say that measures to screen out those who show symptoms of the virus would not catch those who show no symptoms.
Health studies and reports that have come out throughout April show that a significant portion of people who tested positive for the virus -- from 25 to 50 percent -- showed no symptoms.

"There’s no way to be 100-percent with this virus," Tunnell said.
"That’s the push and pull."

The defense groups acknowledge that trials will have to resume at some point, and say that the issues that came up in Ashland County will have to be ironed out well before potential jurors, lawyers, court staff and attorneys are brought into the courthouse.
Friedman cited Cuyahoga County’s COVID-19 Legal Task Force, a group of judges and lawyers from all levels of courts and legal practices that hold a weekly virtual meeting to discuss issues as they come up during the pandemic, as a guide for other counties to use to avoid what happened in Forsthoefel’s courtroom.

Friedman worries that judges forcing trials to go forward without addressing these issues will force many lawyers who fall into higher-risk categories, or have loved ones who do, to go back into a courtroom and risk exposing themselves or their loved ones who are vulnerable to the disease.

"When one of those lawyers gets sick and possibly dies, are the judges prepared to accept their responsibility for their role in that?"
Friedman asked.
"This is a life and death situation right now."

Read more stories

Ohio Supreme Court orders Medina County judge to stop holding all in-person, non-emergency hearings during coronavirus pandemic

Ohio Supreme Court chief justice calls for 'uniform buy-in’ among judges in response to coronavirus pandemic

Cuyahoga County judges, lawyers create task force to evaluate courthouse response to ‘new coronavirus era'

Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.



####
document number 14: 
How to Create a Niche Website in 2020 (Step-By-Step)



Ever dreamed of lying on the beach while earning tons of passive income?

I did.

I wanted to build my own business that generated thousands of dollars while I slept, partied, and traveled around the world.

So, in 2015, my friends and I created a niche website to teach beginners how to breakdance.

Sadly, we never made enough money to quit our jobs and move to paradise.

But here’s the thing…

Though we weren’t successful, the experience taught me

a lot

about how to build a niche website, market it, and monetize it.
And combined with the knowledge I’ve gained working at Ahrefs, I now know the keys to success.

In this post, I’m going to show you what I’ve learned:

What I did right, what I did wrong, and what I would do differently if I created a new niche site today.

We’ll start with a quick definition, followed by a few examples…

What is a Niche Website?


A niche website is a website that caters to a small segment of a large market by focusing on a common, specific interest.

My website, BreakDance Decoded, was a niche website.
It specifically targeted breakdancers, which is a small part of the much larger "dance" market.

Other examples of niche sites are Mr. Money Mustache (focusing on saving and budgeting in the personal finance market) and Kopywriting Kourse (focusing on copywriting in the marketing/business market).

There’s a common misconception that a niche website is a small site.
This isn’t true.

"Niche" refers to the segment of the market, not the size of the website.

A site can be niche and still have thousands of pages covering a variety of topics related to the niche.


Nerd Fitness is a niche website that writes about fitness for nerds.
Even though it’s only targeting a specific type of persona, the site has hundreds of blog posts ranking for important keywords in Google.

In general, a niche website is an information website.
It either produces or sells information that solves problems (e.g. courses, ebooks, etc.).

It may eventually pivot to other monetization models like e-commerce, but the core engine behind the site is information.

Now that you know what a niche site is, let’s take a look at how you create one:

1.
Choose Your Niche


For many aspiring bloggers, niche selection is one of the most challenging dilemmas they face when starting a blog.

They either have too many ideas, or — worse — they have no idea what kind of site they should build.

It doesn’t help that there’s lots of contradictory advice out there: some people suggest you start with your passion, while others say you should choose a niche that’s profitable.

How I Chose My Niche


Personally, I started with my passion.


Not counting my job, breakdancing was the activity I spent the most time doing.
So, setting up a niche site that would educate people about breakdancing was a no-brainer for me.

If you’re completely new to building a site and you just want to learn how things work, I would recommend you start with your passion.

Why?

Because growing a website is hard work.

But if you’re creating content on a topic you’re passionate about, you’ll be able to find the motivation to persist on those days you feel like quitting.

(And trust me, those days will be frequent.)

How I Would Choose My Niche Today


Today, I would choose a profitable niche.

What’s that?

It’s a niche with a large audience that

buys things

.

And that’s what you want:

A market where people are buying, buying, and buying.

While it was fun to write about breakdancing, it was a tough market to crack.
When we started, there weren’t any other niche sites about breakdancing.
Our competing sites were mostly e-commerce stores selling apparel for breakdancers.

In hindsight, that should have been a warning sign.

If there are no competitors in the SERPs (Search Engine Results Pages), you should be concerned.

Competitors = Viable Market

Competition is healthy.
It’s a sign the market is worth entering.
It’s a sign there’s money to be made.

We should have listened.

To help you avoid the mistake we made, here are a couple tips to help you find profitable niches:

Tip #1: Brainstorm + Snooping Around


Sit down and brainstorm some niches you’re interested in pursuing.
Then, do a quick Google search to see if there are any sites dedicated to them.

You can search for "best [niche] blogs" to get started (e.g.

"best breakdancing blogs"

).

And once you’ve found a few potential competitors in your niche, "snoop" around their site and see how they’re monetizing.

If they have a variety of products, it could be a good niche.

For example, let’s say I am interested in the paleo niche.
A quick Google search for the "best paleo blogs" brings me to this site:

Looking around, I can see Diane monetizes her site in a variety of ways:



Books


Programs/Courses


Amazon Affiliates


Certifying other health coaches


Etc.



Seems like a good niche!

Tip #2: Browse Affiliate Marketplaces


Alternatively, you can also look into affiliate networks like ClickBank and Amazon Associates.
These are middlemen networks that connect bloggers and niche site owners with companies offering affiliate marketing opportunities.

You have an audience, they have a product.
Perfect match!

Affiliate networks are ideal because:


These products are being bought by people interested in different niches;


They have a variety of categories you can browse.



Just go through them until you find products you’re interested in.

Here’s an example:

Right now, I’m learning Russian.
So, I might be interested in starting a niche site about the Russian language.

And lo and behold, ClickBank has a category for the Russian language.
Cool!

Unfortunately, there is only one product for sale in this category.


That isn’t promising.
If it was a profitable niche, there would probably be more options.

However, when I click on "Languages", I see lots of courses.
And if I follow tip #1, searching for "best language hacking blogs" brings back a strong list of competitors, such as Fluent in 3 Months.

So, "Russian" might be

too

niche.

But "language" learning could be a niche worth pursuing.

Key Takeaways



If you’re completely new, start a niche website for one of your hobbies or passions.


If you know what you’re doing, choose a profitable niche.


To find profitable niches, do a Google search to see if there are any sites ranking in the SERPs for your target topic.
If there are, snoop around to see if they’re monetizing.


You can also use affiliate networks like ClickBank to find interesting niches to enter.



Further Reading


2.
Setup Your Site


Done with niche selection?

Great.
Now it’s time to setup your site.

There are four things you need when you first get started:


Domain


Hosting Provider


Content Management System (CMS)


Theme (Plus Some Essential Plugins)



Now, don’t worry if you’re not tech-savvy.
I wasn’t great when I started too.
I’ll be running through what each of them are, so you can get started fast.

How I Setup My Site (and How I Would Do it Differently Today)


See this?

This is a domain.
Think of your domain as the address to your house.

A lot of beginners get stuck on this phase.
They procrastinate, hoping to find a perfect domain name.

The hard truth?
There’s no such thing.

For us, we wanted a domain that was memorable but self-explanatory.
We wanted people to understand what the site was about immediately.

That meant we needed the word "breakdance" in our domain.
After brainstorming a few ideas, and consulting the thesaurus, we settled on

breakdancedecoded.com

.

Don’t spend all your time deciding on the domain.
Just make sure it is:


Short and memorable;


Easy to spell.
Imagine if someone asked you for your domain in real-life.
Would it be easy for someone to remember and type it in later, or would they struggle to remember?


Includes your niche.
This tells the visitor right away what your site is about.



If you’re stuck, you can use a tool like Domain Name Brain to give you some ideas:


Once you’re done deciding the name, check if it is available in a domain registrar like NameCheap (affiliate link) or Hover.

Next: A Hosting Provider


To have a house, you need to have the architecture to hold it.

Your host is that architecture.

A hosting provider allows your website to be accessible on the Internet.

Since we weren’t technically-savvy, we followed a friend’s instruction and got our hosting from WPEngine.

In hindsight, that wasn’t a good decision.
WPEngine is great, but it is pretty costly for a beginner site that won’t get that much traffic.

If you’re starting out, you probably won’t be getting very much traffic.
So, it’s better to get a cheaper host.

There are plenty of hosting providers out there.
Take a look around.
Smart Blogger recommends SiteGround (affiliate link), so they’re one option to consider.

Content Management System (CMS)


A content management system is an online tool that enables you to create and manage your content (e.g. blog posts).
WordPress is the most popular CMS, but there are other alternatives too.

Since we were using WPEngine, we turned to WordPress as our blogging platform.

As you’ll see later on, the biggest traffic channel for a niche site will likely be Google.
As such, you should choose a CMS that is SEO-friendly.

Most search engine optimization (SEO) experts recommend WordPress, and it’s the CMS I recommend too.

Once you’re done with the installation, you’ll need a theme.

A theme is a template that defines the appearance of your site.
(Think of it like the design of your house).

For our theme, we chose Genesis.

Genesis isn’t the best-looking theme around, but at the time we were looking for efficiency and ease of use.
(Plus, we weren’t that great with design.)
We also figured that we could upgrade to a better theme later on, if we got more successful.


With its simplicity, Genesis was a great theme for us.
If you’re more design-savvy, feel free to pick another theme.

Smart Blogger recommends Astra Pro (affiliate link), but you can also browse through the selections in ThemeForest.

Once you’re done, install these two free plugins:


Akismet.
Helps you combat comment spam.


Yoast SEO.
Helps you easily optimize your on-page SEO.



If you want more WordPress plugins to install, check out this list of time savers.

Key Takeaways



Don’t get analysis paralysis when it comes to your domain name.
Choose one that is memorable, easy to spell, and includes your niche.


Since you won’t get very much traffic initially, start with a cheaper, flexible host, like SiteGround.


Choose WordPress as your CMS.



Further Reading


3.
Do Topic Research


Your foundation is set.

It’s time to start getting traffic to your site.

How I Did My Topic Research


Now, at this point, most bloggers make the same mistake:

They write about whatever tickles their fancy.


I know because I did the same thing.

I brainstormed topics I thought would resonate with my audience, and then I wrote about them.
The only reason I got away with it was because I was a breakdancer writing to other breakdancers.

I knew the topics that would interest my audience because I was a part of that audience.

But if you’re working in a niche that is unfamiliar to you, you can’t just write about anything you want.

Those topics won’t resonate and you won’t build an audience.

Worse:

Your content won’t rank in Google, which means no traffic will come to your site.

How I Would Do My Topic Research Today


For most niche sites, the best way to get traffic is SEO.

SEO is an acquisition channel that will grow passively.
As long as you are ranking well for the keywords you’re targeting, you will get passive traffic.

Compare that with other channels.

You could experiment with paid ads (for example, Facebook ads), but as soon as you stop the campaign or run out of money, your traffic dries up immediately.

The same goes for social media.
You have to either build up a large audience (difficult) or bank on viral hits (also difficult).
And as soon as you stop tweeting and sharing, whatever traffic you were getting will disappear.

Search engine traffic doesn’t stop.
It keeps going.
Even when you’re sleeping.

If you want search traffic, you need to write about topics that people are searching for.
In other words:

You need to create content for topics with search traffic potential.

In SEO parlance, this is known as keyword research.

Here are a few ways you can do it:

Use a Keyword Research Tool


The easiest way to get started is to use a keyword research tool.

Enter any seed keywords related to your niche into a keyword research tool, and it will generate hundreds of different ideas you can target.

For example, here’s a free keyword tool called AnswerThePublic:


AnswerThePublic generates ideas for you based on different categories: questions, prepositions, comparisons, alphabeticals, etc.

There are plenty of other free tools out there, like:

Take your pick.

One of the most important metrics SEOs look at when doing keyword research is search volume.
Essentially, search volume is the amount of searches per month for a keyword.

The problem with a free tool is that, while it’s free, it usually has either missing or incomplete data.

As such, you might want to consider using a professional keyword tool like Ahrefs’ Keywords Explorer (affiliate link).

You can access it using the Ahrefs’ $7 for 7-days trial.

Enter a seed keyword into Keywords Explorer, and it will generate thousands of keyword ideas, plus all sorts of relevant SEO metrics:

Here’s a quick explanation of everything you’re seeing in the above screenshot:



Keyword Difficulty (KD).
Ahrefs’ Keyword Difficulty metric gives you an estimate of how hard it would be to rank in the Top 10 search results for a given keyword.


Search volume (volume).
This shows you how many times per month, on average, people in a given country search for your target keyword.


Clicks.
This shows you the average monthly number of clicks on the search results that people make while searching for the target keyword.


Cost-per-click (CPC).
This shows you the average price that advertisers pay for a click on their ad in Google’s paid search results for a target keyword in a given country.


Clicks-per-search (CPS).
This shows you the average number of clicks people perform after searching for a given keyword.


Return Rate (RR).
This shows you how often the same person searches for a given keyword over a 30-day period.


SERP Features (SF).
This refers to how many Google’s SERP Features appear in the search results for this keyword.


Parent Topic.
This shows you a better topic you can target as opposed to the keyword you’re entered.



Lurk in Communities


There are communities for every imaginable topic out there.

Love the TV show Brooklyn Nine-Nine?
There’s a subreddit for that.
Enjoy discovering new products?
Well, that’s how ProductHunt was formed.

You name it, they have it.

People gather in these communities to ask questions, discuss trending news, get recommendations, and so on.

Translation: these communities offer a wealth of topics for your niche site.

When we started, we hung out a lot on r/bboy, a subreddit for breakdancers.
This was where we got our initial list of topics:


You can do the same too.

Do a search and find all the communities related to your niche.
You can find them in places like:


Reddit;


Quora;


Facebook;


Slack;


Forums (yes, they still exist);



And much more.

To find out if these topics have search traffic potential, you can install the Chrome/Firefox extension Keywords Everywhere on your browser.

You can also enter these topics into Keywords Explorer.


Ahrefs will show you all the SEO metrics, plus suggest a better topic for you to target ("Parent Topic").

Figure Out What Your Competitors are Ranking for


Your competitors have done the hard work for you.
They’ve been blogging and ranking in Google.

Your job?
Borrow generously.

Find out what’s working for them, and then replicate those topic ideas.

Most sites feature their best-performing posts on their blogs, usually in a sidebar:

You can easily see which keywords they’re optimizing for.


For example, the post 595 Power Words That’ll Instantly Make You a Better Writer is obviously optimizing for the keyword "power words."

If you’re unsure, you can click through to the post.
If they’re SEO-savvy, they would have optimized their URLs for the target keyword.


Of course, the best way is to use a tool like Site Explorer.

Enter your competitor’s domain into the tool and go to the "Top Pages" report, where you’ll see all the pages sending them the most search traffic:


Key Takeaways



To get search traffic to your niche website, you need to target topics that people are searching for.
To do this, you need to do keyword research.


You can either use a free keyword tool or a paid, professional version.


The paid version will also allow you to check all the keywords your competitor sites are ranking for.


To find out what your readers are searching for, you can also lurk in communities to find widely-discussed topics.



Further Reading



What to Blog About: 3 Steps to Mapping out Your Ideas in a Logical Way by Jon Morrow



4.
Create Your Content


Jon Morrow is right:

"The best content is king."


If you want to rank in Google, build an audience and compete with others, you have to create epic content.

You have to publish the best article ever written about those topics with search traffic potential.

The posts have to be detailed.

They have to be in-depth.

They have to answer every single question about that topic.

How I Created My Content


When we began our niche site, we were already huge fans of the detailed, long-form articles published by Smart Blogger and Backlinko.

So, we sought to emulate them.

We even published a

17,000-word article

on how to get started with breakdancing.

It was our most successful article, but it took us almost a month to write.

You might be wondering:

"If you’re writing such long articles, how can you publish something every day?"


Answer: you don’t.

Publishing every day is a fool’s game.

What you should do is to focus on quality, not quantity.

If you have to publish less, so be it.
Don’t sacrifice the depth of your article on some arbitrary content schedule.

(For us, it was impossible to stick to a schedule, as we had full-time jobs.)

You want to be known for the quality of your work — not how quickly you pump out new articles.

That being said, what does it mean to create great content?

When we started, all we knew was we needed to create something in-depth.
We weren’t writers and had no blogging experience.

In short, we had no way to measure and define "great content."
We just went with our instincts.

Today, things are different.
After reading and writing so many pieces of content, I can see which articles can be classified as great, and which can’t.

How I Would Create My Content Today


I no longer need to rely on my instincts.
I know what "great content" is and what it must embody.
It needs the following three characteristics:

Characteristic #1: Quality


Quality is subjective, of course.

How then do you know you’ve created something worth shouting about?

In my experience, quality consists of three factors:


Design.
Is the website design great?
Is it easy-to-read?
Are the images beautiful?
Or is the site cluttered with hundreds of banner ads, each distracting your reader from the main purpose, which is to consume the content?


Content.
Does the article flow?
Is it interesting, entertaining, and useful?
Or is the article full of grammatical and spelling errors that makes reading it off-putting?


Usefulness.
Does the article actually solve a problem?
Does it discuss the topic in-depth?
Or is it merely beating around the bush?



If the content you produce meets these three factors, it’s great content.

Characteristic #2: Uniqueness


There are thousands, if not millions, of articles published on similar topics each and every day.

Why would someone choose your article over the others?

The best way I’ve found to create unique content is to write from personal experience.

Characteristic #3: Authority


Do you want to learn astrophysics from a Caltech physicist, or your next-door neighbor?

Of course, it’s the Caltech physicist.
(Unless, you once lived next to Richard Feynman.)

Your readers are the same way.

No matter the topic, they want to learn from an authoritative source.

If you’re the expert, great!
Carry on.

But what if you aren’t?

Get the experts to help you.
Be the journalist.
The scribe.
There are plenty of experts with great knowledge, but insufficient ability to communicate that knowledge.

You can be the go-between.

Interview them.
Curate their thoughts, research and expertise.
You can even invite the expert to write an article for you.

For example:

Tim Ferriss.
Tim doesn’t have expertise in every topic in the world, but he touches

lots

of topics.
He does this by inviting experts to contribute to his books.

If you read our epic guide to breakdancing, you’d see it checked all three aspects we just covered:


Quality.
While it wasn’t the best-designed post, we formatted it well and added a header image (done on Canva).
We even added a Table of Contents!


Uniqueness.
We wrote the entire thing based on our years of experience in dance.
We told plenty of stories that were highly unique to what we had seen and observed.


Authority.
All of us had at least 7-8 years of breakdance experience.



Key Takeaways



If you want to rank in Google, make sure you create great content.


Focus on quality — not quantity or satisfying some "content calendar."


Great content has three characteristics: quality, authoritativeness, and uniqueness.
You need to do all three.



Further Reading



Demystifying Epic Content: How to Actually Create It (Not Just Jabber About How Important It Is) by Sonia Thompson


How to Write a Blog Post in 9 Steps (That People Actually Want to Read) by Ahrefs



5.
Promote Your Content


Do you want to know the greatest lie in the content marketing world?

It’s this adage:

"If you build it, they will come."


Nothing can be further from the truth.

Think about it.

According to the latest stats, there are 4 million blog posts published every single day.
That’s a lot of noise.

That also means there is an extremely low chance that somebody will randomly stumble upon your site.

If you want traffic, you have to be proactive.
You have to promote your content.
You have to build links.

How I Promoted My Content


We focused on three promotion techniques:

Technique #1: The "Eager Sneezers" Technique


In a post published in 2015, Bryan Harris shared how he started an email list from scratch and got 205 subscribers in 48 hours.

The technique he used?
"Eager Sneezers."

Ignoring the fancy name, it’s essentially reaching out to your friends and inviting them to join your email list.

Bryan’s biggest takeaway was your friends want to help you (so let them).

We used a variation of this idea to get our early traction.

After publishing a post on breakdance music, we reached out to multiple friends to help share it.

Fortunately, as we were breakdancers ourselves, we had a number of breakdancer friends who were more than happy to help:


Technique #2: Community Content Promotion


Remember the communities you joined earlier (where you were "lurking" for ideas)?

They’re great for content promotion too.

Here’s one example of what we did:


Now, this is not an excuse for you to strut into someone else’s community and start spamming links to your content.

Online communities exist for people to have meaningful conversations about a particular topic.
Link spam defeats that purpose.

Plus, you’ll likely get booted out of the group.

The only reason I was able to promote my content in a group like this was because I was already an active member.
I was participating in discussions, asking questions, and commenting.

I knew what kind of content the community would appreciate, which was why I was able to share it.

So, before you start dropping links to your content in a group, make sure you are active and understand the group’s rules.

Technique #3: Outreach to People You’ve Mentioned in Your Content


If you’ve written an epic piece of content, you’ve likely linked out to sources or quoted experts.

Let them know!

For example:

In our post, we listed 157 songs a breakdancer must listen to.
This meant 157 different people we could email.

So, we did.
And it resulted in one of the featured artists sharing our post on Facebook:


How I Would Promote My Content Today


According to a survey of 1,117 bloggers, higher-income bloggers put more emphasis on promoting their content than lower-income bloggers.

Translation: if you want to succeed, you have to keep on promoting your content.

If I were to create a new niche website, I would add these content promotion strategies into my toolkit.

Strategy #1: Outreach to People Who Published Articles on the Same Topic


Since they’ve written on that topic before, there is a higher probability they’ll be interested in seeing your post.

To find these people, simply enter the topic of your article (remember to try variations!)
into Google.
Collect the list of articles that appear in the SERPs.

Then find their email address and reach out.

Alternatively, you can use a tool like Ahrefs’ Content Explorer, a search engine for web content.

Enter the topic into Content Explorer, do some filtering (like "English only"), and export the list.


You now have a huge list of sites to reach out to.

All that’s left is to write the email.

Here are a few tips to help you write a compelling email:


Keep it short.
Most people are busy.
You improve your chances of getting your emails read if it’s short and to the point.


Tell them what’s in it for them.
Everyone looks out for #1.
Provide value upfront and let them know what they can get out of it.


Personalize the email as much as possible.
People can tell when an email is a template.
If they think it’s a template, they’ll delete it without reading.


Ask wisely.
People dislike being told to do something.
Don’t be pushy.
If you’re asking for a link, suggest the idea gently.



You can also read this in-depth guide about blogger outreach.

Strategy #2: Guest Blogging


Guest blogging is a tactic where you write a post for another website (instead of yours).

In exchange for your "free" article, the owner gives you:


A few links back to your site (either within the body content or inside the author’s bio);


Exposure to their audience;


Referral traffic.



Those are just the immediate benefits.
Guest blogging also allows you to build relationships with influencers, or even grow your email list.

The biggest challenge with guest blogging is finding blogs willing to accept your guest posts.

To increase your chances of being accepted, look for sites that are already accepting guest posts.

You can find these sites via Google search operators.
Here are a few examples:


[your_topic] "write for us"


[your_topic] "become an author"


[your_topic] "guest post"


[your_topic] "guest article"


[your_topic] inurl:contribute



These sites usually have a "write for us" page, so all you have to do is to follow their instructions.

You can also look for these opportunities in Content Explorer.
The reasoning: if a blog has written about a topic before, there is an increased probability they would cover it again.

Enter any word/phrase from your niche into Content Explorer.

Check the "one article per domain" box to get a list of unique domains you can potentially write for:

Some of these sites may not have an obvious "write for us" page.
But, most blogs will accept a guest post if your pitch is good enough.


Key Takeaways



If you want traffic, you have to promote your content.


To kick-start your site and get some initial traction, try the "Eager Sneezers" technique.


You can also promote your content in communities.


If you’ve mentioned anyone in your posts, reach out and let them know.


To take it to the next level, try guest blogging and reaching out to people who’ve written about similar topics.



6.
Grow Your Email List


Study the best sites in any niche, and you’ll notice one thing:

They all build an email list.

An email list is powerful because you can do almost anything with it.
You could:


Survey your subscribers to get content ideas;


Ask them for feedback;


Test monetization ideas;


Sell something.



The possibilities are virtually endless.

How I Built My Email List


Because we were observing these huge sites, we understood the power of the email list very early on.
In fact, we obsessed over collecting as many emails as possible.

We tested all kinds of strategies on the site.

Welcome Mats:


Content Upgrades:

We even turned our homepage into an email collection machine:



How I Would Build My Email List Today


In hindsight, we were too aggressive with our email collection.

We were so concerned with the

number of emails

on our list, the quality of our list suffered.

We should have focused on user experience and only placed email sign-up forms where relevant.

Over the years, Jon and the rest of the Smart Blogger team have written tons of guides on email list building, so I won’t delve too deeply into this topic.

You can check out the different resources here:

Key Takeaways



Build a list!
It’s the most important thing you need to do.


Test different methods for collecting emails on your site.


But don’t neglect user experience.
Don’t cram 100 pop-ups on your site just so you can get a few more subscribers.



7.
Experiment with Monetization


What’s the purpose of a niche site?

To make money!

As you start gaining traction on your site, and gaining a few subscribers, you can start to look into monetization.

How I Monetized My Site


At BreakDance Decoded, we experimented with a few different strategies.

Strategy #1: Patreon


Patreon is a membership platform where fans can "fund" content creators.
You can create separate tiers on Patreon to reward different levels of loyalty.

Back then, Patreon was a relatively new-ish platform.
We saw that a few legitimate artists and creators were generating significant amounts of money on the platform, so we gave it a shot.

This was our Patreon page:


No matter how hard we marketed ourselves, the best we did was $50 per month on Patreon.

That’s not to say Patreon doesn’t work.

There are plenty of successful Patreon artists, like Kurzgesagt, who has over 12,000 patrons supporting his work:

Your results may vary.


Strategy #2: YouTube AdSense


In addition to our website, we were also running a YouTube channel.
So, we decided to see if we could make enough money from YouTube.

Yes, we dreamed of being the next PewDiePie.

These were our results:

It was decent, but it wasn’t enough for a "passive income" source.


Plus, our niche was too "specific", so we probably didn’t generate enough views to make financial sense.

Strategy #3: Coaching


One of Jon’s recommendations was to sell video or phone coaching as a quick way to monetize your site.

We took it seriously.

We sent an email to our list, telling them we were available for personal breakdance coaching.
At the time, this was a relatively new concept to the niche, so we weren’t sure if it would work out.

Surprisingly, someone took us up on it.

Strategy #4: Online Courses


By 2025, the e-learning industry will grow to about $325 billion in size.

This probably explains why most popular blogs monetize via online courses.

However, our biggest concern (back then) with an online course was the time and effort it took to create a great one.
Plus, we weren’t sure if there were any demand for an online breakdance course.

The notion of spending considerable time, effort, and money into creating a course no one wanted didn’t sound appealing.

But after testing all the different strategies listed earlier, creating an online course seemed to be the most viable option.

So, we decided to launch a MVP (Minimum Viable Product).

We sent a survey to our email list, asking them for their #1 challenge.

From there, we came up with a hook we thought would interest our audience:


Hey friend,


Don’t you feel like breaking has limited support and not enough is done to help you improve?


Sure, there are tons of studios out there, and jams have become widespread.


But not every breaking tutorial fixes the problem effectively.
Not everyone gets access to the information and knowledge from other bboys.
Not every country or state has a strong breaking scene.


This lack of environment for growth sucks, because so many potential bboys and bgirls around the world deserve a chance to learn breaking.


Ideally, a bboy/bgirl’s progress should only be ‘limited’ by their own effort.
Not the environment.


As a first step to tackle this problem, I’ve created a 1-minute survey to get to know you better (don’t worry it’s 5 simple questions, no right or wrong answers here.)


So click this link to fill up our quick survey!


Thanks for helping me to understand your breaking views.
It will go a long way for both you and me 🙂


While we waited for feedback, we created an outline for a potential 9-week course.

Using the email hook and the outline, we crafted a 5-day email sequence modeled after Ramit Sethi’s successful launches.

Not knowing what to charge, we decided on an arbitrary sales price of $37.
For the test to be successful, we told ourselves that we needed at least 10 sales.

As we weren’t technically savvy, we had no idea how to collect orders online.
We also didn’t have money to invest in a shopping cart software.

So, we kept it simple:

We created a PayPal link.

Then we activated the 5-day campaign by sending our subscribers a launch email.

To our surprise, we actually managed to sign up 12 students.

Our test was successful!

The only issue?
We now had to actually create the course.

Once again, instead of investing in some complicated course software to launch it, we decided to do it the easy way:

Facebook had just launched its "Live" feature and was heavily promoting it.

We decided to use it.

We created a closed Facebook group, sent an email to our 12 students, and invited them to join the group:

Then we filmed each lesson by using Facebook’s Live feature.


Besides some technical issues (like audio), we received rave reviews for our course.


Takeaway:

Don’t let perfectionism stop you from launching.
People buy courses for the information, not the software you use or how perfect it looks.

What I Would Do Differently Today


I wouldn’t change a thing.

Online courses worked for me then, and it’s the monetization strategy I would use today.

That said…

Your results may vary.

It’s a good idea to play around with different monetization methods to see what works best for you.
Even if you find a cash cow, always be looking at different ways you can diversify your income stream.

Otherwise, you’re asking for trouble.

Nomadic Matt has a blog that receives 1 million visitors each month, but as shared in his interview on

Noah Kagan Presents

, if he had continued with the same business model he had when he started (i.e. selling links), his business would have been dead in the water by now.

Key Takeaways



Test different monetization strategies and see which one works out best for you.


Patreon, online coaching, and online courses are all viable methods to generate revenue.


You can also consider other methods like affiliate marketing, selling eBooks, and so on.



Further Reading



Affiliate Marketing for Beginners: Go from 0 to $1,000 In Passive Income by Leanne Regalla



Are You Ready to Create a Profitable Niche Website?


This wasn’t a case study about how successful I am or how many Lamborghinis I now own.

It’s the opposite.

My site wasn’t successful by any means.

Instead of sipping mojitos at the beach, I’m still working out of an office.

But that’s because I didn’t know then what I know now.

Now I know better.
Now I know what to do.
And now so do you.

It

is

possible to build a niche website and monetize it.

So what are you waiting for?

Paradise is waiting.



####
document number 15: 
US targets, kills Iranian military leaders in rocket strike at Baghdad airport






####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = assasination
document number 1: 
Montenegrin Crime Boss Shot in Ukraine, Suspects Arrested





After a short but dramatic chase, Ukrainian authorities arrested on Wednesday four men for having tried to kill the alleged boss of a Montenegrin criminal clan that has been involved in a bloody war with a rival gang over control of cocaine smuggling from South America.

Arrest of suspects of an assassination attempt.
(Photo:


Police said they identified the badly injured victim as a Montenegrin national who is "wanted internationally as one of the leaders of a Montenegrin drug cartel" that supplies most of Europe with drugs.

The Chief of the National Police, Igor Klymenko, said that the four suspects arrested in Odessa were from North Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, and that one of them is "on the international wanted list for contract killing."

Police released a video of the assasination attempt made by surveillance cameras.
It shows the victim running by a parking lot and two men jumping out of a Mercedes Smart car and firing several shots at him.

The injured man can be seen escaping and the assassins taking off.
Another footage shows the killers getting out of the car, pouring some liquid on the seats and setting it on fire so fast that one of the men ran away as his clothes were burning on him.

The victim was immediately taken to the hospital.
Klymenko said that the perpetrators tried to escape and resisted the arrest.
He never revealed the identity of the victim or the suspects.

OCCRP partner KRIK, however, identified the person injured in Kyiv as Radoje Zvicer, the alleged leader of the Kavač criminal clan which has been fighting another clan called Škaljari.

Zvicer, as OCCRP, Krik and MANS reported earlier this month, is the most mysterious leader of the Kavač clan.
Reporters have only been able to find one photograph of him, and there is very little information available about his criminal or personal life.

Both clans hail from Kotor, on Montenegro’s Adriatic coast.
They were once part of the same gang smuggling drugs from South America, but split in 2014 after a cocaine deal in Spain went bad.
This created a violent rift that has deepened ever since and that has pulled in other Serbian and Montenegrin crime groups, according to the OCCRP/Krik/MANS investigation.

The assasination attempt was "part of a possible spat over redistribution of spheres of influence within the clan, or between the Balkan criminal clans that control the drug trafficking," the statement of the Ukrainian police said.

The police chief’s claims matched the OCCRP/KRIK/MANS Balkan Cocaine Wars report about the battle the two gangs are fighting over who will control the cocaine smuggling routes from South America and feed Europe’s 5.7 billion-euro-a-year habits.

The suspects arrived in Ukraine in early May, according to Klymenko, obtained vehicles, weapons and started surveilling the target, which local security cameras recorded.

Police said they established the route the assassins took to escape, heading towards the border to Moldova over Odessa, where they were arrested.



####
document number 2: 
Bitcoin extortionists threaten victims with ‘hitman’ unless they cough up $4K


Cryptocurrency scams are getting more old-school with every week that passes.
Hacks seem to be too difficult these days and old-fashioned threats are becoming the way of the crypto-criminal.

According to emails seen by Bleeping Computer, scammers are now threatening victims with a hitman if they don’t pay $4,000 in Bitcoin BTC to call off the hit.

The emails appear to come from the owner of a dark net website who has recently received an order from someone to hire a hitman to assassinate the email recipient.
The assasination market owner is offering, for the small sum of $4,000 in Bitcoin, for the hit to be called off, they will also "remove the hitman" too.

Credit: Bleeping Computer


The date on the emails suggests that these began to surface in the last couple of days, but according to the report, the address has not yet received any Bitcoin – hopefully, it never will.

Given how poorly written the email is and how far-fetched the claims are, it should be clear to most people that it’s a hoax.
Usually in these types of scams the perpetrators give instructions on how to transfer the Bitcoin, which makes us even more suspicious that this wasn’t entirely thought through.

Indeed, it’s no surprise given the potentially easy payoff that crooks will try this type of tactic.
Just last week, cryptocurrency scammers were sending bomb threats to schools, businesses, and government offices in an attempt to earn some quick Bitcoin from scared victims.
Thankfully, these scams don’t appear to be working.

Pssst, hey you!


Do you want to get the sassiest daily tech newsletter every day, in your inbox, for FREE?
Of course you do: sign up for Big Spam here.



####
document number 3: 
NoFundMe: NRA Protest March Nets $70 in National Fundraising Effort


Crowd funding is a relatively recent innovation that allows a person or cause to leverage the vast reach of the Internet to raise money for virtually every imaginable purpose.
Even small donations of a few dollars can aggregate into impressive sums with sufficient participation.
It also provides an interesting window into the sorts of appeals that move people into parting with their own hard-won cash, as participants vote with their wallets, rather than just their online clicks or survey answers.
To that extent, it can provide some insight into what issues really attract substantial grassroots support.

It does, however, require a "crowd."
This recently proved to be a problem for a national appeal aimed at raising funds for the so-called "National March on the NRA" (NMNRA).
Despite the effort’s prominent exposure on the organizing entity’s website and social media platforms, and the hype the event itself received from a "news" apparatus eager to portray gun control as enjoying resurgent popular support, NMNRA’s online fundraising effort was an unmitigated bust.
Before the campaign finally closed, it had attracted only 3 contributors who ponied up a grand total of $70.

Here in Northern Virginia, that might just about get you a tank of gas for an 8-passenger van.


As astute observers of gun control advocacy already know, there is very little that is "grassroots" about it.
Its funders are principally billionaires who believe their vast wealth entitles them to remake American culture in their own image, guys like Michael Bloomberg, George Soros, and Paul Allen.
They are fortunately few in number but undeniably mighty in resources.

What they haven’t yet managed to do, however, is create a culture in which the idea of taking away peoples’ rights moves ordinary individuals to sustained action.
Causes that have attracted more support on the same crowd funding website NMNRA used have included a young man seeking money for "booze and cigarettes" (224% more support), an aspiring Yoga instructor (757%), and a parade float for a mother who wears heavy metal t-shirts (6,084%).

More to the point, there has also been greater support for a competitive shooter hoping to participate in an international match (1,357%) and a young cancer patient’s hunting fund (2,357%).

For months, the mass media has been insisting that America has turned a corner in its popular support for gun control and in its opposition to the NRA.

But talk, as they say, is cheap.

When you get past the media filter and see the sorts of choices Americans are making on their own, it becomes pretty clear they’re just not buying what the gun control advocates are pushing.



####
document number 4: 
A 1919 Colonial House Finds Renewal in Soft Tones


Clever ideas for a Colonial home kitchen remodel and a newly-created bathroom

When Amanda, a former pastry chef, and Cory, a tech executive, saw their 1919 Yonkers Colonial house for the first time, they were charmed.
They loved everything, down to the kitchen’s dated salmon formica.
But they also knew that after they lived there for a bit, they would be renovating it to suit their family’s needs.
With their son, Herschel, and their cat, Horse P.
Cat, they moved into the 2,600-square-foot home and brainstormed about how to best remodel the kitchen and add a new downstairs bathroom.

To bring their Colonial home remodel to life, they posted their project on Sweeten and hired this Westchester-based contractor.
Sweeten matches home renovation projects with vetted general contractors, offering advice, support, and financial protection—at no cost to the homeowner.


"After" photos by Miao Jiaxin for Sweeten

Guest blog post by Sweeten homeowner Amanda


A charming (but not functional) Colonial home


We had been dividing our time between a farmhouse in Dutchess County and a walk-up apartment in Brooklyn.
When our son was born, neither of these homes was quite suited to us.
We decided to find a place in between with a shorter commute for my husband, more social opportunities for me, and easy access to the home.

When we first saw the house, we were charmed by the time-capsule of a kitchen—salmon formica, dark-wood cabinets, and a dishwasher that predated the other elements.
That said, we knew we would eventually update the kitchen.
Having a lavatory on the ground floor and not having to run upstairs was also on the wishlist.


The existing kitchen had one radiator, which was buried in the back of a custom cabinet.
It was a clever solution at the time, but ate up a lot of cabinet space and wasn’t heat-efficient.
We decided to install a radiant floor heating system that we could run off of our existing hot-water heating system.
A more formal, fully-functional island would offer storage, outlets, and a bigger counter area.


Save



####
document number 5: 
DFA launches ePayment for passport applications


EPAYMENT.
A passport applicant tries out the ePayment portal of the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) in Market!
Market!
on June 14, 2018.
Photo courtesy of DFA


MANILA, Philippines – The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) on Thursday, June 14, launched its ePayment portal that requires passport applicants to "pre-pay" their passport processing fees before their appointments at DFA consular offices.

In a press release on Thursday, June 14, Foreign Assistant Secretary Frank Cimafranca said the ePayment system "will initially apply for applications lodged at the DFA Aseana Consular Office" along President Diosdado Macapagal Avenue, Parañaque City, beginning June.

The system "would be rolled out in Metro Manila in July and nationwide by August," Cimafranca said.

"With ePayment, we expect that no-shows in our consular offices will be significantly reduced, if not totally eliminated.
By pre-paying, applicants are encouraged to show up lest they forfeit their passport processing fee," Foreign Secretary Alan Peter Cayetano said.


Cayetano said that without ePayment, only 60-65% of applicants show up for their passport application appointments in DFA consular offices.

When the DFA tested ePayment at DFA Aseana, Cayetano said 94-97% of passport applicants showed up for their appointments.

"Applicants can pay the passport processing fee through any of the following payment centers: Bayad Center; EcPay; Pera Hub; Robinsons Business Center and Department Store; Walter Mart Department Store; 7-Eleven; USCC Western Union; and Villarica Pawnshop.
Other payment centers as well as credit/debit card payment facility will be made available soon," the DFA said.

The agency said the public can access more information about the ePayment portal through this link.
The public can also call the DFA's help desk at (02) 234 3488, or email info@passport.gov.ph.

The DFA also said it was opening 100,000 passport application slots on Thursday, June 14.

Cayetano added that, after this, the DFA would open 10,000 slots from Monday to Saturday, except holidays, such as June 15.
He said that on these days, the DFA would open 5,000 slots at noon and 5,000 more at 9 pm.
– Rappler.com



####
document number 6: 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance operations: 'Eye in the sky'


Photo By Master Sgt.
Brian Ferguson | The MQ-1 Predator provides armed reconnaissance, airborne surveillance and target... read more


SOUTHWEST ASIA - "Complete adaptation to environment means death.
The essential point in all response is the desire to control environment."
These words from the American philosopher and reformer John Dewey make the point that as conditions change, we must not simply adapt to them, but instead endeavor to control the new reality that is created by them.
This principle has been at the forefront of U.S. military innovation as a new battlefield has emerged characterized by militants, insurgencies and guerrilla warfare.

At the tip of this innovation are the revolutionary changes being seen in Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance operations.
This innovation can be seen in how ISR supports Afghan and coalition forces on the ground as well as the Afghan population throughout the country.

"Clearly, airborne ISR capability has become indispensible to successful ground and air combat operations, and the U.S. Air Force brings the lion's share to the battle," said Col.
Eric Holdaway, director of the Intelligence for Air Force forces in the Middle East and Central Asia.
With respect to combat operations, the ISR mission provides a level of planning, analysis and targeting support never seen before in the history of warfare.
"One of the most important aspects of airborne ISR is the way that it makes ground reconnaissance more effective, and vice versa."

Lt. Col.
Kirk Karver, ISR Division Deputy Director at the Combined Air and Space Operations Center in Southwest Asia, explains that "through analysis we provide information on the current situation, but also provide 'predictive' information giving combat forces visibility of emerging, future enemy actions and threats.
In this same way, we are able to bring intelligence to bear on the targeting process, ensuring that we have the most accurate and precise information available so that we only effect the targets we intend to effect."

The capability to enhance the targeting process is extremely important as it demonstrates how this new technology contributes to reducing non-combatant casualties.
Through the use of multi-source intelligence and real-time information delivery, ISR enables Afghan and coalition forces to be very patient in pursuing Taliban and al-Qaida cells.
"Identifying and maintaining identification of targets is a significant capability to help reduce the risk of hurting the innocent," Col.
Holdaway added.
"If women and children are there, you don't hit the target at that time; you wait until you believe you can hit the enemy and only him."

Col.
Holdaway emphasized the importance of new information gathering capability.
"Information is thus taken to a whole new level.
With the new technology we have the ability to not just see the enemy, but build a 'pattern of life', enabling us to engage at a time and a place of our choosing."

This improved capability is important especially in light of the enemy tactics of fighting in and around civilian populations.
"Our duty compels us to pursue the adversary in a way that is both effective and, at the same time, does not endanger non-combatants," said Col.
Karver.

Col.
Karver added that another key aspect of ISR capability is in how it supports the Afghan government and citizens.
Through its pre-route surveillance and convoy over-watch, ISR is able to provide exceptional security for humanitarian missions such as UN World Food Program convoys and Provincial Reconstruction Team efforts to develop fundamental essential services.
ISR also supports elections to include voter registration and providing election day security through armed reconnaissance and over-watch.
Maybe most importantly, they provide security for national assets such as dams, power lines, and "watching and protecting" major cities.
They do all of this sight unseen; most of the time performing their missions invisible to those on the ground.
They become an important force multiplier by enabling Afghan and Coalition forces to make maximum impact with limited forces engaged on the battlefield.

Those who support ISR do not stop when the mission is completed.
Their Processing, Exploitation, and Dissemination teams conduct continuous qualitative and quantitative analysis looking at every ISR flight to see how they could improve future performance.
This continuous analysis and improvement has enabled these relatively new systems to quickly provide more and more value to those they support in a relatively short period of time.
Over time the continued development of these systems will lead to a future where information is even more integrated into air and ground operations with all combatants viewing real time, common sets of data and reacting to furnished analysis with speed and accuracy.

ISR has given military leadership the ability to not just adapt, but in a large degree to control the many changing aspects of the battlefield.
They do this through improved technology and process design, as well as a keen desire to deliver vital information to combatants in the field.
Col.
Holdaway summarizes ISR's new found value best by explaining that "through this new technology we have a better idea where enemies are and can better characterize their behavior.
The resulting operational intelligence provided to Afghan and coalition forces helps provide a more secure environment for the Afghan people.
We believe that will in turn allow them to rebuild their nation and provide their children with a better future, one in which al-Qaida has no part whatsoever."



####
document number 7: 
I Got a Job I Love in Real Estate Without Meeting All the Qualifications


Taylor Haeffele


Taylor Haeffele thought being a dietitian was her dream role.
Passionate about both psychology and health, this role would allow her to become an expert in nutrition

and

help people make positive changes in their lives.
In Haeffele’s mind, it didn’t get any better than that.

So, after finishing her dietetic internship, she got a job as an RD in a hospital.
For Haeffele this experience was inspiring and humbling.
There was just one problem: She wasn’t happy.

"I just didn’t

love

nutrition," she says.
"I had peers who’d passionately tell me about the nutritional breakdown of their Thanksgiving dinner while I was perfectly content rocking a diet of ramen and mac ‘n’ cheese.
I just couldn’t find the fervor for this stuff."

But even though her gut told her this field wasn’t for her, she had trouble walking away.
Not only had she put a ton of time and effort into it, but she was pretty good at it, too.

One day, as she was typing up a protein supplement plan, it hit her.

"No matter how much I learned, no matter how much I tried to take on more projects, I knew I’d never find that passion I’d been holding out for since college," Haeffele explains.
That same night, she started looking for new jobs.

She applied to everything, from tech to recruiting to insurance.
During her search, she stumbled across the posting for her current job, and she was immediately intrigued.
Though she’d worked as a receptionist and assistant at a residential real estate company throughout high school and college, it’d never dawned on her to explore real estate further.

"This posting helped me realized I was genuinely interested in the real estate world," she says, "And, after falling in love with the vision of the company, I slowed down my job search and focused specifically on

this

position."

She didn’t meet many of the qualifications for the real estate specialist role, but she applied anyway and got it.
After a year and a half, Haeffele can confidently say she’s "incredibly happy" with her career change.

"I’m forever grateful that my company was willing to take a chance on a dietitian," she says.
"If they hadn’t, I might never have realized my potential as a professional."

To learn more about Haeffele’s career story, including how she landed the job, keep reading.

What Does it Mean to Be a Real Estate Specialist?


I work alongside our company’s legal team to purchase medical office buildings and guide the process from contract to close.
It’s my responsibility to ensure that our company complies with the terms of the purchase agreements, that the property aligns with our portfolio expectations, and that the rest of our acquisition team stays on top of deadlines.

Why Do You Think You Got a Job You Weren’t Qualified for?


What I learned in this process is that it’s not always about fitting the mold.
Sometimes, it’s about fitting the team.

My supervisors have since told me there were two main reasons they took a chance and hired me: They appreciated that my lack of experience would give them the opportunity to teach me the necessary skills in a way that catered to our company, and they thought that I hit it off with the team from the start.
That last part was more valuable to them than a solid set of technical skills.

Is There Anything From Your Experience as a Dietitian That’s Relevant to Your Current Role?


Absolutely!
Both roles require the ability to switch mindsets at the drop of a hat.
As an RD, I was often on my way to see one patient when a nurse would quickly need to speak to me about a different one, so I needed to have my knowledge of each patient’s case readily available.
And as a real estate specialist, I’m always jumping from deal to deal, so I always need to be up-to-date on the details of every transaction.

In addition, a key skill I learned as an RD was working toward a common goal with a large team.
In the hospital, I needed to constantly communicate and collaborate with the patient’s entire care team—nurses, physicians, therapists, you name it—to ensure our goals aligned and benefited the patient.
This is similar in my current job, where I’m working with underwriters, accountants, property managers, and more to close a deal.

What Advice Do You Have for Fellow Career Changers?


Cater your resume to the specific job you want, narrowing in on how you’re able to make your personal experience work to fit their needs.
Be yourself and be confident, on paper and in person.
Because confidence in yourself and your abilities will sell you to an employer better than any work experience ever could.

Want to be featured?
Email us at editor@themuse.com with the subject line Career Story and tell us your name, your current job, and a bit about your career journey.



####
document number 8: 
The Wendy’s Boycott begins: Video, photo report from Day One of the Workers’ Voice Tour!



Epic rally, street theater, march through Midtown Manhattan launch second boycott in 15-year history of Campaign for Fair Food!


The Campaign for Fair Food has known many an historic moment in its 15-year history — the launch of the seminal Taco Bell Boycott, the victory in that campaign four years later that established the Fair Food principles, the raucous celebration of the second Fair Food agreement with McDonald’s at Chicago’s House of Blues, the first-ever agreement with a Florida tomato grower in 2010 that led to the agreement with the Florida Tomato Growers Exchange one month later and the launch of the Fair Food Program, and the agreement with the world’s largest retailer, Walmart, in 2014, just to name a few.

But even against the background of that heady timeline of struggle and change marking the progress of the CIW’s Campaign for Fair Food over the past decade and a half, yesterday’s launch of the Wendy’s Boycott stands out as a momentous day in the fight for Fair Food.

CIW’s Gerardo Reyes Chavez, surrounded by hundreds of consumer allies and farmworkers from Immokalee, brings the day’s events to a close with a powerful, final message for Wendy’s Board Chairman Nelson Peltz: "We are here to remind Nelson Peltz that there is something more important than money: Dignity!"


And so to commemorate that day, we bring you a video and a photo report that capture — or do their best to capture — the size and spirit of Day One in the Workers’ Voice Tour, day one of the Wendy’s Boycott.

First up, here’s a video overview of the day, from the kickoff rally off Columbus Circle to the march on the Park Avenue offices of Trian Partners, Wendy’s Board Chairman Nelson Peltz’s activist hedge fund (and Wendy’s largest shareholder):


And of course, here is the photo report, chronicling the day’s events from start to finish:


The day began as the bus that left Florida the day before arrived in NYC and workers from Immokalee disembarked at the rally site on the corner of 58th Street and 8th Avenue, where they were met by hundreds of allies from across the city.


Speakers included Kerry Kennedy (above), President of Robert F. Kennedy Center for Human Rights: "The State Department of the United States of America said the CIW is one of the greatest groups on earth in the fight against slavery.
Anti-Slavery International said the CIW is one of the greatest organizations on earth fighting slavery.
The President of the United States, Barack Obama, said the CIW is one of the greatest groups in the world stopping slavery.
We are here today in solidarity with the CIW and with farmworkers across the country and we are taking this fight to Wendy’s because Wendy’s we need your help, we need to end exploitation and respect farmworkers."


Reverend Michael Livingston (above), Executive Minister at New York’s historic Riverside Church: "What Wendy’s is doing is unethical, unjust, and immoral.
In the terms of my faith, it is sinful.
It offends God.
Wendy’s has got to learn that you can’t run away from the Fair Food Program!"


Brad Lander, New York City Council Member, representing Brooklyn’s 39th District: "So we’re proud to be here today, we’re proud to join the march, we’re proud to boycott Wendy’s, and we will keep it up until we win and they join the Fair Food Program!"


Gabriella Quintanilla (above), representing the Student/Farmworker Alliance: "Student/Farmworker Alliance has been organizing for three years now to bring Wendy’s on board, and last year we announced a national student boycott.
And we will continue to do so because Wendy’s needs to get on board.
Get with it, Wendy’s, get with it!"


And, of course, Lupe Gonzalo and Gerardo Reyes of the CIW: (

Lupe

) "Eleven years ago, the CIW won the first Fair Food agreement with Taco Bell.
Since then, the progress that has been achieved in the tomato industry has changed our lives as workers significantly."
(

Gerardo

) "Those changes have resulted in one of the most profound transformations that the agricultural industry has ever seen.
You would think that, after so many agreements and so much progress, corporations would no longer need this kind of pressure to recognize the humanity of workers in their supply chains."
(

Lupe

) "Wendy’s hasn’t only refused to sign an agreement with farmworkers here, they are trying to escape responsibility to buy tomatoes in Mexico where there is still exploitation, taking advantage of the poverty of those workers where there is still forced labor, sexual abuse, and child labor."
(

Gerardo

) "As workers, we are here to tell Wendy’s that that is the worst decision they could have made."


Following the speeches, the theater began, the world premiere of "The Wedding of Wendy’s and the Tomato of Wrath."
First on the stage was the Tomato, preceded by a bent and broken figure representing the workers who pick it, workers abused without remedy and paid poverty wages…

… next to walk the aisle, Wendy’s dressed in her finest for the big day.



A Justice of the Peace read the vows: "

We are here to unite in holy matrimony the last of the fast food companies to refuse to participate in the Fair Food Program with the farms where there’s no respect for the human rights of their farmworkers.

Wendy’s do you accept the Tomato of Wrath and promise to always buy tomatoes where the workers don’t have a voice or rights?
Where there are no health or safety protections and where the Fair Food Program does not exist?
SI!

Tomato of Wrath,

do you accept Wendy’s as your wife, promising to sell her tomatoes picked where there is no guarantee of workers’ rights, and where there are abuses like wage theft, sexual harassment, and violence in the fields, until death do you part?
SI!"

If anyone can show just cause why these two should not be joined together in holy matrimony, speak now or forever hold your peace…"


A worker rises from the crowd and declares:

"I oppose this marriage!"

"I am a tomato picker from Florida and I oppose this wedding because Wendy’s ignores the voice of the worker.

She doesn’t support our rights.

She even invented an empty code of conduct just to try to distract the public from our code of conduct that is functioning and improving things for workers."



Following the worker, a grower spoke, denouncing Wendy’s for having run to Mexico "

where there’s documented sexual harassment, child labor and even modern-day slavery,"

and following the grower a consumer (above) spoke, declaring, "

I’m not going to eat anymore at Wendy’s until they sign the Fair Food Agreement!"



Hearing the opponents’ reasons, the Justice of the Peace decides, "

I have no choice but to call off this union.
The wedding is canceled.
And the bride and groom are ordered to Join the Fair Food Program immediately!"

And with that, the banner was lifted: Boycott Wendy’s!

And the crowd couldn’t have agreed more…



… but there was still one thing left to do — switch out the

old

signs…


… for the

new

!
And with the brand new "Boycott Wendy’s" signs out of storage and raised high throughout the crowd, the march to Trian Partners on Park Avenue could begin.

With banners…



… and thousands of flyers distributed to curious — and supportive!
— onlookers…

… art that rivaled even the best that New York’s streets had to offer…


… and marching music from the ever-true Rude Mechanical Orchestra…



… the march made its way down the 1.5 mile route and into the night.
The crowd swelled with allies old and new, including New York’s own Make the Road (who joined us on the very first Taco Bell Truth Tour, for that matter, back in 2002)…

… and Domestic Workers United…



… before it finally arrived in front of Trian’s offices and broke into two circling pickets stretching the length of the block.


The hour-long picket provided still more time to educate passersby with flyers and friendly conversation (here the newest generation of the Fair Food Nation gets busy explaining why we were protesting in front of this particular building).


And as night fell, the message of the day rang out loud and clear: Boycott Wendy’s!


A message shouted to the rooftops and echoing off the walls of some of Midtown Manhattan’s most expensive real estate…


… a message that many in those luxurious offices were hearing for the first time, though most certainly

not

for the last.

Check back soon as the Workers’ Voice Tour makes its way to its next big stop and action in Columbus, OH, Wendy’s corporate hometown!



####
document number 9: 
A Timeline of Outbreaks from 2000 to Present


Illustration by Joelena Despard


All information is reported under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization.

1999-2002 – West Nile Virus

The first account of the West Nile Virus in the U.S. was in New York City in the summer of 1999.
The virus was transmitted by mosquito bites, concentrating in areas with warmer temperatures\; as the number of human cases grew, so did the number of bird deaths.
During a three-year period, WNV spread to 44 states, amounting to 4,156 cases and 284 deaths.
Typical symptoms include breaking out in high fever, a stiff neck and headaches, though most people who are infected do not show any symptoms unless the infection is serious.

2001 – Anthrax

After 9/11, letters contaminated with white powder containing anthrax spores were delivered to a news media company and two U.S. Senators’ offices.
The powder let the anthrax spores float in the air to be breathed in.
The first diagnosed case came in October of 2001, and climbed to a total of 22 cases and five deaths.
The FBI led a nine-year investigation on how anthrax got in those letters, and concluded the powder came from a research lab.

2003 – SARS-CoV

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, a viral respiratory illness caused by a coronavirus, was first diagnosed in Asia in February of 2003, later reaching the U.S. in that same year.
Common symptoms included high fevers, coughing and shortness of breath.
A total of 8,098 people worldwide became sick, with only eight of those cases being in the U.S., and 774 people died.

2006 – Mumps

The U.S. saw multi-state outbreaks of mumps reporting more than 6,500 cases in 2006, concentrating mainly in Midwestern college campuses.
Mumps spread through close-contact activities such as sports, dancing, kissing, etc.
From 2009 to 2010, the largest outbreak reported 3,000 cases in a close-knit religious community in New York City after an infected student returned from the UK where there was another outbreak.
Notable symptoms include fever, puffy cheeks and a swollen, tender jaw.

2006 – E. coli Salmonella

Escherichia coli was first reported in the U.S. in 2006 through the contamination of fresh spinach, with 199 reported cases and three deaths within 26 states.
The following year, Taco Bell was linked to E. coli cases in the northeastern area of the U.S.
The contraction of E. coli can lead to the development of Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome and potentially kidney failure, while other notable symptoms are severe diarrhea and respiratory illnesses.
In 2008, 49 cases in multiple states were linked to consuming Kroger Beef and in 2009 raw cookie dough was the culprit.
However, the most infamous outbreak occurred in 2015 where a total of 58 cases were reported in 14 states.

In 2006, tomatoes were linked to Salmonella for a total of 183 cases in 21 states.
The list of foods linked to salmonella ranged from cantaloupe, peanut butter, raw chicken to even pet food.
In 2012, cases of Salmonella linked to small turtles led to a total of 473 cases in 43 states but no deaths reported.
The most recent outbreaks have been reported from consumption of a specific brand of tahini in 2018.
Common symptoms include diarrhea, fever and abdominal cramps.

2009 – H1N1 Virus (Swine Flu)

In April of 2009, 20 cases of swine flu were reported in the U.S., eventually becoming a pandemic flu reaching 208 countries by December and resulting in at least 12,220 deaths.
The swine flu was transmitted by pigs as a respiratory disease, usually through contact with farm raisers or participation in fairs.

2012 – Whooping Cough

Also known as pertussis, this respiratory disease surmounted to 48,277 cases in the U.S. in 2012.
Coughing fits last up to 10 weeks or more and can be life-threatening for infants.
Worldwide, the estimation of whooping cough cases is 24.1 million with about 160,700 deaths per year according to the National Center for Biotechnology Information.

2012 – MERS-CoV

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome was first found in the Arabian Peninsula in 2012 and was also associated with the coronavirus once the illness became viral.
Only two cases were found in the U.S. in 2014, one in Indiana and another in Florida, linked to health care providers who previously worked in Saudi Arabia.
Up until 2019, 2,494 cases have been reported, including 858 deaths.

2014 – Ebola

Ebola was found in Africa near the Ebola River in 1976, but the outbreak that recently caught the world’s attention started in Guinea before spreading to neighboring countries, with the highest cases in Sierra Leone of 14,124 and 3,956 deaths.
Ebola reached the U.S. but only recorded four cases and one fatality, and in 2015 the CDC announced a vaccine against the disease.
The most recent outbreaks of Ebola occured in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2018.

2016 – Zika Virus

The most at threat potential victims for this mosquito-transmitted disease are pregnant women, whom if bitten, their pregnancy could result in stillbirth, preterm birth or fetal loss.
In November of 2016, 84 countries were reported to have Zika virus cases in the Americas, with the first cases reported in Brazil, then spreading in high numbers to New York, Florida and Texas.

2020 – Coronavirus

On Jan.
30, the World Health Organization declared a "public health emergency of international concern" for the new coronavirus, COVID-19, originating from Wuhan, Hubei Province in China.
Like SARS and MERS, this virus originates from certain animals before infecting humans, and has spread quickly.
The confirmed locations of the virus’ presence are in Asia, the U.S., Canada, Australia, Europe and Russia.



####
document number 10: 
US targets, kills Iranian military leaders in rocket strike at Baghdad airport






####
document number 11: 
How to Develop a New Product (From Concept to Market)



Bringing your vision for an original product to life is frequently one of the biggest hurdles for aspiring entrepreneurs.

The product development process can seem almost mysterious, and when you hear the origin stories of other great businesses, the journey to a finished product rarely resembles a straight line.

Tina Roth-Eisenberg, for example, realized that semi-permanent tattoos were lacking when her daughter brought some home, and mobilized her community of fellow designers to create Tattly.

David Barnett, on the other hand, had to teach himself how to use 3D design software so he could prototype PopSockets, the now-popular phone accessory.

On their own, these inspiring stories don’t provide an end-to-end blueprint for product development, but the similarities they share reveal some of the steps founders consistently take on the road to starting a business and shipping a finished product.

Excited about starting a business, but not sure where to start?
This free, comprehensive guide will teach you how to find great, newly trending products with high sales potential.

The new product development process in 6 steps


New product development is the process of bringing an original product idea to market.
Although it differs by industry, it can essentially be broken down into five stages: ideation, research, planning, prototyping, sourcing, and costing.

Here's how to develop your own original product idea and what to consider at each stage.

1.
Ideation


Many aspiring entrepreneurs get stuck on ideation, often because they’re waiting for a stroke of genius to reveal the

perfect

product they should sell.
While building something fundamentally "new" can be creatively fulfilling, many of the best ideas are the result of iterating upon on an existing product.

The SCAMPER model is a useful tool for quickly coming up with product ideas by asking questions about existing products.
Each letter stands for a prompt:


Substitute (e.g. fur in faux fur)


Combine (e.g. a phone case and a battery pack)


Adapt (e.g. a bra with front clasps for nursing)


Modify (e.g. an electric toothbrush with a sleeker design)


Put to another use (e.g. memory foam dog beds)


Eliminate (e.g. the middleman to sell sunglasses and pass the savings on to consumers)


Reverse/Rearrange (e.g. a duffle bag so that it doesn’t wrinkle your suits)



By asking these questions, you can come up with novel ways to transform existing ideas or even adapt them for a new target audience or problem.

If you're still looking for your "aha!"
moment, we also put together a list of sources for coming up with your own product ideas, from analyzing online marketplaces and product descriptions for inspiration to reinventing historical trends.

2.
Research


With your product idea in mind, you may feel inclined to leapfrog ahead to production, but that can become a misstep if you fail to validate your idea first.

Product validation ensures you’re creating a product people will pay for and that you won’t waste time, money, and effort on an idea that won't sell.
There are several ways you can validate your product ideas, including:


Talking about your idea with family and friends


Sending out an online survey to get feedback


Starting a crowdfunding campaign


Asking for feedback on forums like Reddit


Researching online demand using Google Trends


Launching a "coming soon" page to gauge interest via email opt-ins or pre-orders



However you decide to go about validating your idea, it is important to get feedback from a substantial and unbiased audience as to whether they would buy your product.
Be wary of overvaluing feedback from people who "definitely would buy" if you were to create your theoretical product—until money changes hands, you can’t count someone as a customer.

Validation research will also inevitably involve competitive analysis.
If your idea or niche has the potential to take off, there are likely competitors already operating in that space.

Visiting your competitors’ website and signing up for their email list will allow you to understand how they attract customers and make sales.
Asking your own potential customers what they like or dislike about your competitors will also be important in defining your own competitive advantage.

The information compiled from doing product validation and market research will allow you to gauge the demand for your product and also the level of competition that exists before you start planning.

3.
Planning


Since product development can quickly become complicated, it’s important to take the time to plan before you begin to build your prototype.

When you eventually approach manufacturers or start looking for materials, if you don’t have a concrete idea of what you want your product to look like and how it will function, it’s easy to get lost in the subsequent steps.

The best place to begin planning is with a hand-drawn sketch of what your product will look like.
The sketch should be as detailed as possible, with labels explaining the various features and functions.

Product sketches from the crowdfunding campaign for a bluetooth speaker by Hidden Radio.


You don't need a professional quality drawing since you won’t be submitting it to a manufacturer at this stage.
However, if you are not confident that you can produce a legible diagram that will make sense of your product, it is easy to find illustrators for hire on Dribbble, UpWork, or Minty.

Try to use your diagram to create a list of the different components or materials you will need in order to bring the product to life.
The list does not need to be inclusive of all potential components, but it should allow you to begin planning what you will need in order to create the product.

For example, a drawing of a purse design could be accompanied by this list:


Zippers (large and small)


Silver clasps


Leather straps


Protection pouch


Embossed label


Interior wallet



Along with the components, you should also begin to consider the retail price or category your product will fall into.
Will the product be an everyday item or for special occasions?
Will it use premium materials or be environmentally friendly?
These are all questions to consider in the planning phase since they will help guide you through not only your product development process but also your brand positioning and marketing strategy.

The packaging, labels, and overall quality of your materials should be considered as well before you continue to the sourcing and costing stages.
These will have an effect on how you market your product to your target customer, so it’s important to take these aspects of your product into consideration during the planning phase too.

4.
Prototyping


The goal of the prototyping phase during product development is to create a finished product to use as a sample for mass production.

It’s unlikely you will get to your finished product in a single attempt—prototyping usually involves experimenting with several versions of your product, slowly eliminating options and making improvements until you feel satisfied with a final sample.

Several prototypes for the Angle Razor by Morrama.


Prototyping also differs significantly depending on the type of product you are developing.
The least expensive and simplest cases are products you can prototype yourself, such as food recipes and some cosmetic products.
This do-it-yourself prototyping can also extend to fashion, pottery, design and other verticals, if you are lucky enough to be trained in these disciplines.

However, more often than not, entrepreneurs will work with a third party to prototype their product.
In the fashion and apparel industry, this usually involves working with a local seamstress (for clothing and accessories), cobbler (for shoes) or pattern maker (for clothing).
These services can usually be found online by Googling local services in the industry.

Most large cities also have art, design or fashion schools where students are trained in these techniques.
Administrators from these university or college programs can usually grant you access to their internal job board where you can create a request for prototyping help.

For objects like toys, household accessories, electronics, and many other hard-exterior objects, you may require a 3D rendering in order to make a prototype.
Artists or engineers who are trained in computer-aided design and drafting (CAD) software can be contracted to do this, using UpWork or Freelancer.
There are also user-friendly online tools such as SketchUp, TinkerCad and Vectary, for founders who want to learn how to create 3D models for themselves.

A 3D rendering for the

Trifecto Infinity Pen

.


To get a 3D design turned into a physical model, makers used to have to get molds made for each part.
Molds are typically expensive and involve set up fees, for things like tools and dies, that are used to cut and shape pieces of plastic and other hard materials.

Luckily, with the innovation of 3D printing, designs can be turned into physical samples at a much lower cost with a quicker turnaround time.

Chris Little, the founder of Wintersmiths, prototyped his line of barware using Quickparts, and explains that he was able to do so on a budget and within a few days time.
Alex Commons of Bulat Kitchen recommends 3D Hubs, which he used to prototype a knife, paying around $30 per 3D-printed model.

A 3D-printed Bulat Kitchen knife design by 3D Hubs.


5.
Sourcing


Once you have a product prototype you’re satisfied with, it is time to start gathering the materials and securing the partners needed for production.
This is also referred to as building your supply chain: the vendors, activities, and resources that are needed to create a product and get it into a customers’ hands.

While this phase will mainly involve looking for manufacturing-related services, you may also factor in storage, shipping, and warehousing into your choices at this stage.

In

Shoe Dog

, a memoir by Nike founder Phil Knight, the importance of diversifying your supply chain is a theme that is emphasized throughout the story.
Finding multiple suppliers for the different materials you will need, as well as different potential manufacturers, will allow you to compare costs.
It also has an added benefit of creating a backup option if one of your suppliers or manufacturers doesn’t work out.
Sourcing several options is an important part of safeguarding your business for the long-term.

When looking for suppliers, there are plenty of resources both online and in person.
While it may seem old-fashioned, many business owners choose to attend trade shows dedicated to sourcing.
Trade shows like Magic in Las Vegas, provide the opportunity to see hundreds of vendors at once—to see, touch, and discuss materials and build a personal relationship with suppliers, which can be valuable when it comes time to negotiate prices.

During the sourcing phase, you will inevitably come across the decision of whether to produce your product locally or overseas.
It is a good idea to compare the two options, as they each have their own advantages and disadvantages.

The most commonly used sourcing platform for overseas production is Alibaba.
Alibaba is marketplace for Chinese suppliers and factories, where you can browse listings for finished goods, or raw materials.
A popular way of using Alibaba to find a manufacturer is to look for listings with similar products to your own, and then contact the factory to see if they can produce your specific design.

6.
Costing


After research, planning, prototyping, and sourcing is done, you should have a clearer picture of what it will cost to produce your product.
Costing is the process of taking all of the information gathered thus far, and adding up what your cost of goods sold (COGS) will be, so that you can determine a retail price and gross margin.

Begin by creating a spreadsheet with each additional cost broken out as a separate line item.
This should include all of your raw materials, factory set up costs, manufacturing costs, and shipping costs.
It is important to factor in shipping, import fees, and any duties you will need to pay in order to get your final product into the customers hands, as these fees can have a significant impact on your COGS depending on where you are producing the product.

A product costing example.
You can view it in full or copy and adapt this spreadsheet to create your own.


If you were able to secure multiple quotes for different materials or manufacturers during the sourcing phase, you can include different columns for each line item that compares the cost.
Another option is to create a second version of the spreadsheet, so that you can compare local production vs.
overseas production.

Once you have your total COGS calculated, you can come up with a retail price for your product and subtract the COGS from that price to get your potential gross margin, or profit, on each unit sold.

Product development in popular industries


The product development process will naturally vary by industry, so let's take a brief look at what you might have to consider across three of the largest and most well-established industries: Fashion and Apparel, Beauty and Cosmetics, and Food and Beverage.

These three industries have relatively straightforward paths to product development thanks to the many well-documented case studies that can be used for inspiration.

Fashion and Apparel


In the fashion industry, product development usually begins the old school way: with a hand drawn sketch, or the digital equivalent using a program like Procreate.

A sketch is then developed into a sample using a pattern maker or seamstress.
During the prototyping phase, a size set is created, which means a range of samples with different measurements for each size you want to sell.
Once the size set is finalized, it is put into production.

Rather than make the product, some fashion and apparel businesses choose print-on-demand to produce their clothing in the beginning.
Print-on-demand allows you to upload designs to a third party app, that connects your store with a warehouse and screen-printing facility.
When an order is placed online, your design is printed on an existing stock of t-shirts, sweaters and various other items on offer, creating a finished product without the need to design the entire garment.

Other factors to consider:



Hang tags: the branded tag that hangs from a garment and usually contains information like price, size etc.


Labels: the fabric tags sewed or stamped into a garment that usually contains information about fabric contents and care instructions


Wash tests: putting your product through wash tests to understand whether it holds up over time and how it should be cared for



Beauty and Cosmetics


The beauty and cosmetics industry includes a wide range of products that is constantly expanding due to wellness and self-care trends.
From makeup to bath products and skincare, many beauty brands are focusing on all natural ingredients and sustainability, which makes it easier to prototype a product on your own using everyday ingredients.

White labeling is also popular in the beauty and cosmetics industry, which is the process of finding an existing product or manufacturer, then packaging and branding the products they already produce.
Whichever route you decide to take, mass manufacturing for cosmetics is usually done by working with a lab and a chemist to make sure quality stays consistent at scale.

Other factors to consider:



Labels and warnings: identifying all materials used in the product and any potential reactions


Laws and regulations: researching FDA regulations and how they pertain to your product and packaging, both where they are produced and where you intend to sell them


Shelf life: conducting tests and adding necessary expiration dates to products



Food and Beverage


Food and beverage products are among the easiest to start developing at a low cost and from the comfort of your own home.
Creating a new energy bar can be as simple as buying ingredients and tweaking the recipe in your own kitchen, like Lara Merriken did when she started Larabar.

In order to move from recipe to packaged goods you can sell in stores or online, you will need to find a commercial kitchen that is licensed to produce food and has passed a health and safety inspection.

These kitchens are usually set up with large ovens and cooking equipment to accommodate large batches, but if you are considering mass production and packaging, a co-packer or co-manufacturer might be a better option.
These are manufacturing facilities that specialize in processing raw materials and producing food and beverage products at scale.

Other factors to consider:



Labels and warnings: ingredient lists, nutritional information to display


Laws and regulations: many countries have regulations around dietary information, allergen warnings, and health claims that you will need to comply with


Expiry dates: understanding your product lifetime and how you will produce, package and stock the product to accommodate this



What will you bring to the market?


During product development, each journey to a finished product is different and every industry has its own unique set of quirks involved in creating something new.
If you find yourself struggling to figure it all out, remember that every product that came before yours had to overcome the same challenges.

By following these steps as you undergo your own product development process, you can break down the overwhelming task of bringing a new product to market into more digestible phases.

No matter what you’re developing, by putting in all the necessary preparation—through researching, planning, prototyping, sourcing and costing—you can set yourself up for a successful final product

Ready to sell your product?


Start your free 14-day trial of Shopify today



####
document number 12: 
Let me tell you about my experience as a convert to Judaism


I was a raised as a Christian, Pentecostal Holiness to be exact.
It was a long journey from there to the Assemblies of God, to a Messianic congregation, to a Conservative conversion and finally to an Orthodox conversion in the land of Israel 13 years ago.

In 2001, my wife, my son and I got off a plane, kissed the ground and were loaded into a truck full of watermelons that dropped us off at an absorption center in Ra’anana.
Those were the good ole days of aliyah, before Nefesh B’nefesh took all the shock and awe out of the experience.

A few days later, a local Rav invited us for Shabbat.
We told our story and started learning for conversion the very next week.
I had a structured learning program with this Rav in the kollel and private learning in a program with a Rav from Bnei Brak.

My wife did all of her learning with a female teacher from Bnei Brak.
I hear the newfangled term for this is Yoetzet.
I don’t think she used that term, but she taught my wife the laws of kashruth, family purity and Shabbath.
She was present in meetings with the Beth Din and she was there for my wife until the day we stepped out of the mikveh as newborn Jews.

The entire process took a total of four months and other than some minimal registration fees, we were never charged money for our conversion.
The community in Ra’anana and friends in our new community of Ma’aleh Adumim made us a beautiful Chuppah.
The Chief Rabbi of Ma’ale Adumim personally paid the fees for registering our marriage and helped me get my first job in Israel.
When we rented our first apartment, the owner of the real estate agency instructed our agent to return the realty fee when she heard we were both new olim and converts.
We were warmly welcomed to the point that we didn’t eat a Shabbat meal in our own home for at least a year.

Ra’anana was great.
Ma’ale Adumim was and still is great.
We never felt abused, slighted or unwelcomed.

I don’t doubt that the conversion horror stories I’ve heard are true and I’m not making light of the allegations and complaints that have been published recently.
I personally know people who have had their families destroyed, been abused emotionally, financially and even sexually within the conversion system in the US.

I’m simply saying that what I’ve been hearing from the US is nothing like the experience I had.
I don’t know if I was blessed or just lucky, but I had a very holy and life-changing conversion experience, and today I’m a…(I was going to say "normal", but anyone who knows me would laugh if they saw that)… I’m a very happy and content Jew, living where I should live, loving and being loved by my family, friends and neighbors.

If you are considering conversion to Judaism, don’t let headlines and op-eds scare you away from the direction your soul is being pulled.
Judaism and Jews don’t always get it right.
All that man touches, he corrupts.
Rabbis come and go, conversion courts come and go, and all will one day give an accounting for what they have done.
But all conversion stories aren’t bad and the truth will always be true.
If you want the truth, you will find it in the Torah of Moses, a tree of life for those who take hold of it.

The people of Israel will be your people, the God of Israel will be your God.
May He guide you and watch over you on your journey.

About the Author

I'm just a simple person that loves learning as much as I can about as many things as possible.
I live in Maaleh Adumim and work in Jerusalem.



####
document number 13: 
Diamond Princess ship to remain in quarantine for a week


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


The largest outbreak outside mainland China is on a cruise ship.
The Diamond Princess off the coast of Japan has now 175 positive cases, 15 of them are Australians.



####
document number 14: 
How long did you take to make your own website?
What was your approach?


My website as it stands sits on a 3rd party website.
You might think how am often number one in google world wide for fashion photographer UK?
Or on page one for fashion photographer.

I build my original website by hand, hand coded with the help of a friend.
I key worded every picture with relevant keywords and alt tags.
I the just linked out for back links, however this was over time.

at one time submitting to google was easier and every page was submitted individually.

I kept updating images and moving them around which suggested a fairly active website and this was my trick.

I also did some pai

To get my website up and running with a pleasant interface, it took me about 1–2 hours, simply because I wasn’t sure what I wanted everything to look like.
I was testing things over and over, and finally settled on the appearance that suited me

To build a website from scratch will take you quite a few hours at least.

To build one using an existing HTML/WordPress theme, probably a few minutes depending on how familiar you are with it.

The approach is just to keep trying new things, and discovering more ways of creating and expanding your website.
It doesn’t have to be perfect to start, so work tow

I rebuilt my website every year for about 10 years.

I'm a Web designer and developer, and so I used my own website as a testing ground for ideas and experiments I wanted to try.

I believe a side project is a very useful thing to keep your skills updated and in order to have skin in the game, I wanted to be very public, so my website was a logical choice.
It has let me learn a lot from physics and collision detection, to writing, animation and content organisation.

Basically, a running website creation refers to buying a domain name, hosting and deploying code.

Buying domain name and hosting hardly take 5 mins.
Visit GoDaddy or some similar sites.

And to deploy code, you can get it from already available templates(buy) then modify anything you need as per your requirement.
These templates will be generally html+CSS+JS.
It takes hardly 1 hour to customize any small changes.
Now the real question begins:

It takes more and more time, depending on the features you need for your website.

It might take days, months, or even years to design.

But a simple website to

Starting a website was like a dream.
I had started a website for My Photography and My Fashion house.

1.)
Basic Planning on the layout

2.)
Designs and Images to be shortlisted.

3.)
Colour combinations.

4.)
Content writing.

I made the website on my own by learning the code and from youtube.

It was a fun project.
Got a lot of compliments..

So yeah it was a super fun project for me.



####
document number 15: 
Gilead’s remdesivir enters China phase III trial to fight coronavirus


Man wearing mask, receiving coronavirus vaccine


BEIJING – China will kickstart a phase III trial Feb.
3 to determine whether patients with 2019-nCoV can be treated with Gilead Sciences Inc.
’s NUC inhibitor, remdesivir, which was originally developed for Ebola, four days after a U.S. patient was said to have recovered by using the drug candidate.

The study, expected to be completed on April 27, is a phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of remdesivir in hospitalized adult patients with mild and moderate 2019-nCoV infections.
It will enroll 270 patients and be carried out in the China-Japan Friendship Hospital in Beijing.

Gilead said it is expediting the laboratory testing of remdesivir against 2019-nCoV samples and working with the Chinese authorities.

Remdesivir is being developed by the U.S. company as a monophosphoramidate prodrug of code GS-441524 that targets viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
It was intended to be an intravenous treatment for Ebola, but it also showed potential against coronavirus and Nipah virus infections.

Remdesivir is yet to be approved anywhere globally and has not been demonstrated to be safe or effective for any use.
However, a paper in

The New England Journal of Medicine

published Jan.
31 suggested there was a possibility of using the drug candidate to help contain the deadly 2019-nCoV virus, which has killed 361 people so far.

On Jan 26, a 35-year-old patient in the U.S. with 2019-nCoV received remdesivir, a week after he was admitted to the hospital, according to reports.
The following day, his fever went down from 39.4 degrees Celsius to 37.3 degrees Celsius, oxygen saturation values improved to 94% to 96%, and the previous bilateral lower-lobe rales were no longer present.

Five days after being treated with remdesivir, he was said to be afebrile, with all symptoms resolved except for his cough, which was getting better.

The encouraging result prompted Gilead and the Chinese authorities to move the phase III trial ahead and expand it to a lot more patients who need treatment desperately.

"Remdesivir is not a well-proven drug in either the U.S. or China," He Gongxin, former chief representative of the Shanghai office at Gilead, told

BioWorld

.
"Since 2019-nCoV is a new virus, we’ll just try it.
There are good scientific reasons for us to believe it could be safe and efficacious.

"I believe this is the best chance we have for now," He added.

In October 2015, a phase I study that evaluated the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of remdesivir in healthy volunteers demonstrated promising results and supported further clinical studies.

The drug candidate has been evaluated in preclinical studies for the potential treatment of coronavirus infection.

"Remdesivir has demonstrated in vitro and in vivo activity in animal models against the viral pathogens MERS and SARS, which are coronaviruses that are structurally similar to 2019-nCoV," said Gilead’s chief medical officer Merdad Parsey.

In mice, remdesivir significantly decreased Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)-coronavirus lung viral loads and improved respiratory function and disease outcomes, whereas lopinavir/ritonavir plus IFN-beta only improved respiratory function, according to the in vivo data presented at the 32nd International Conference on Antiviral Research in Baltimore in May 2019.

The in vitro data presented at the same conference in May 2017 showed that remdesivir was highly active against multiple coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), MERS and murine hepatitis with EC50 in the range of 0.02-0.07 mM, and exhibited selectivity indexes of 135 to 1,600 in human and murine cell lines.

As for now, it remains to be seen if there is antiviral data for remdesivir that show activity against 2019-nCoV.

"The U.S. patient’s conditions improved significantly, but that’s all we have," He told

BioWorld

.
"Once the clinical trial completes in April, the conclusion will be clear."

He added the end of April would likely be the earliest point to tell if remdesivir works, as the clinical trial cannot go any faster.
The treatment itself will take nine days, and the data analysis will also take time.

As of Feb 3., 17,242 people are confirmed to be infected and 361 have died.
The numbers have skyrocketed over the past few weeks.

Due to the enormous pressure to curb the spread of 2019-nCoV, remdesivir could be the first drug used on Chinese patients under the compassionate use program, which was written into China’s Drug Administration Law in August 2019.
The U.S. allowed remdesivir to be used on the 35-year-old patient on a compassionate basis.

Remdesivir had already been used on the same basis on a patient in the U.K. infected with Ebola in October 2015.

Global efforts

Currently, there are more than 40 drugs under development globally to fight the coronavirus infection, and efforts are concentrated on SARS and MERS.
Among the drug candidates, 65% are against MERS and 25% against SARS.

The global pipeline will see two new drug candidates targeting the novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV, which will be developed by Moderna Therapeutics Inc.
as an mRNA vaccine and Inovio Pharmaceutical Inc.
as INO-4800.

Also joining the R efforts are Johnson Johnson, Novavax Inc., Vir Biotechnology Inc., Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Wuxi Biologics Cayman Inc., Stemirna Therapeutics Co.
Ltd., Bravovax Co. and Geovax Labs Inc.
Ltd.

In academia, Hong Kong researchers led by microbiologist Yuen Kwok-yung have made progress in developing a vaccine for 2019-nCoV by modifying an influenza vaccine with a part of the surface antigen of the coronavirus.
The University of Queensland (UQ) in Australia is also aiming to develop one.

HIV drugs also play a part.

Lopinavir/ritonavir, a HIV-1 protease inhibitor marketed by Abbvie in 2000, will be investigated in a clinical trial in China for 2019-nCoV.
Ascletis Pharma Inc.
has also filed with regulators to include its ritonavir and ASC09 fixed-dose combination for emergency use.
The company said Feb.
3 it is in talks with medical researchers to assist them in initiating clinical trials.

No Comments



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = smuggling
document number 1: 
The Truth About Gem Smuggling


The term evokes pictures of swashbuckling pirates and trench-coated international spies.
The reality is far more gritty and physically dangerous on an individual level.
Real smugglers, known as "mules," often carry stones from the mine over treacherous terrain by foot, horse, or motor scooter to gem brokers in bordering countries who sell to international buyers.
Those international buyers may themselves become smugglers, bringing the gems into their home country illegally.

One of the most confusing questions surrounding international gem smuggling is what it means to smuggle a stone.
The answer is not as straightforward as one might think.

From the U.S. perspective, an item smuggled into the United States is one that is not officially declared.
That definition may seem obvious, but it’s a little-understood facet of the customs process that only gemstones that are not declared on entry are considered smuggled.
Even if a gem left its country of origin illegally, it can still be legally imported into the United States through simple declaration of its value.

Imports from some countries are outright prohibited.
The United States currently embargoes items from Myanmar (formerly Burma), Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, and those which specifically benefit terrorists, members of the government of Zimbabwe, and some former Balkan leaders.
In terms of colored stones, the only prohibited country of origin is Myanmar, so most smugglers bring gems in illegally for other reasons.

Ironically, one of the biggest reasons is ignorance.
The United States has no import duties on loose gemstones, and yet gems are often smuggled by people who believe the duties exist, according to representatives from the customs office in Miami, Florida.
In some cases, the importer brought the gems out of the country of origin illegally and wants to avoid scrutiny at the border.

How big is the problem?
The U.S. government has no official statistics — or official estimates — on the number or value of colored stones which enter the United States illegally every year.
They simply do not exist.
The reason, according to a former government employee speaking off the record, is that gem smuggling simply is not a high-profile problem.
"You’re talking about a total annual market of about $788 million, and illegal gems don’t hurt anyone.
How many resources would you allocate to the problem?"

Law enforcement cares about gem smuggling when it is linked to terrorism, money laundering, drug smuggling, or organized crime.
Smuggled gems are sometimes discovered in connection to one of these activities, but gem smuggling by itself is a relatively low priority.

The situation is compounded because of the inability to ascertain the origin of stones.
Customs agents are incapable of differentiating a Myanmar ruby from a Thai ruby, for example.
Because they are not gem experts, they also have very little ability to estimate the value of a stone, so importers can vastly under-declare the value of an item to avoid the import taxes that are applied to all merchandise.

All this means that, while gem smuggling into the United States undoubtedly takes place daily, the U.S. government lacks both the capability and the political will to stop it, or even track it.

Ring Around the Government


Producing countries have a much different view of smuggling.
For them, gems bleed from every possible fissure, at every level.
They are smuggled out of countries, in some cases, because it is illegal to own or sell them; to avoid export fees; because obtaining a permit to sell them is extraordinarily difficult; or because they are stolen from the mines in the first place.
They are smuggled at every level: by individual miners, by mine owners, by members of the military, and by rebel groups.

Estimates on the amount of stones smuggled out of producing countries vary wildly, depending on the source.
In 1996, the Colombian government officially valued its emerald exports at $180 million and said illegal exports — i.e., those for which no taxes or royalties were paid to the Colombian government — were more than 10 times that amount.
According to a 2001 report funded by the U.S. Agency for International Development, 45 percent of Tanzania’s colored gem production is smuggled out of the country, and legal exports were undervalued by 50 percent.
Pakistan estimates illegal gem sales at "more than 100 times" legal gem sales, and it is impossible to make any serious estimate of smuggling out of Myanmar or Afghanistan.

In every case, attempts by the producer-country governments to reduce illegal smuggling through tighter controls actually increase the amount of colored gems illegally exported.
The smuggling routes exist because they are cheaper and easier than exporting through legal channels.
Once smuggling routes have been established, they are difficult to disrupt — especially in cultures with widespread corruption, where officials are paid to look the other way.

Who, Why, and How?


The only real prerequisites for smuggling to occur are for a country to produce stones and for there to be an external demand for those stones.
If there are high import or export duties, tightly controlled ownership, a culture of smuggling, or an enforcement system that is easily avoided or seriously flawed, it’s a prime recipe for smuggling.

Illicit gem trafficking often occurs at the individual level, but it also involves large syndicates.
According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Russian, Chinese, Italian, and African organized crime groups illegally move colored gems across international borders to avoid customs duties or taxes.
Russian organized crime, for example, extracts and sells more than 300 metric tons of amber a year — worth more than $1 billion — according to international law enforcement.
India’s long and porous coastline allows criminal operations there to smuggle drugs, gemstones, and other prized contraband.

Two of the largest sources of smuggled gems are Myanmar and Afghanistan.
Both countries have an entrenched history of smuggling, a culture which supports it, well-established smuggling routes, a wildly corrupt enforcement system, and a large contingent of processors and buyers in bordering countries.

Most Afghanis don’t think of taking emeralds, rubies, lapis, or other precious stones from Afghan mines, through treacherous mountain terrain, and across the border as "smuggling."
It is the way items have moved for centuries, along the same trails, and it is simply the way things are done.
Many individual "mules" claim not even to know that what they are doing is illegal, or that there are any alternatives.
In a country without an educational system, railway, commercial air service, national mail delivery, power grid, functioning banks, national police, army, civil service, tax collection, or judiciary, it is difficult to explain that to legally transport gems, one must have a permit from the government.

One professional gem smuggler explained that to get a permit, it would take him at least five days to get to Kabul and up to six months to actually get a document from the government.
In the process, he would have to bribe multiple government officials, some of whom probably have little to do with the actual process, and he will eventually receive a piece of paper.
He would then return to the mine and would still have to cross the mountains, stave off attacks from warlords, rebels, and criminals, and bribe different government officials.
The government document gives him nothing, and costs him both time and money.

Currently, gems are moved from mines in the northern Hindu Kush region to Peshawar, Pakistan.
To reach Pakistan, the smuggler will cross mountains of 7,000 to 14,300 feet.
There also are likely to be attacks by armed criminals — either affiliated with local warlords or "independents" — which require paying bribes or judiciously avoiding certain areas.
Moreover, the Pakistan border is now difficult for Afghanis to enter, often requiring additional bribes or stealth to get into Peshawar.

Once in Peshawar, the gems are purchased by brokers or dealers.
Most buyers are Asian or European.
They take the gems back to centers in Hong Kong, Antwerp, or elsewhere, and the country of origin is rarely mentioned.
According to U.S. gem analysts, many Afghani emeralds are purchased by Polish buyers, who sell them as Colombian emeralds.
There are even unconfirmed reports of Colombian emerald mine owners paying international purchasers of high-quality Afghani emeralds to classify them as Colombian emeralds.

Ask a Myanmar contraband smuggler about the U.S. embargo against Myanmar goods, and he likely will have no idea what you are talking about.
Myanmar goods, including colored stones, are smuggled out of Myanmar to Thailand to avoid ridiculously high government taxes, to skirt government control, and because it is the way goods have moved for literally hundreds of years.
The U.S. embargo has almost nothing to do with the Myanmar side of smuggling.
Gems are smuggled by individual miners, private companies that partner with the government, army officials, drug dealers, and rebels.

Gem smuggling from Myanmar to Thailand is even more dangerous than from Afghanistan to Pakistan, but it is also one of the only ways many Myanmar citizens have to break out of extreme poverty.
The two primary starting points for colored stones are Mogok and Mong Hsu.
"Mules" move a few gems at a time by hiding them on themselves.
They then take a two-day trip by foot, motor scooter, or horse to deliver the gems to a dealer in a Thai border town.
During the trip, the "mule" — usually a woman — will have to cross several official border crossings, where lackadaisical government officials will conduct a cursory inspection.
The smuggler pays a bribe to the official and is waved through; whether an individual is carrying contraband or not is irrelevant.

They also likely will face renegade members of the army, armed rebels, security forces of drug lords, mine fields, and wild animals.
U.S. officials describe the journey as going through "a completely lawless frontier," where there is every imaginable danger.
If a relatively wealthy individual wants to smuggle gems without taking the dangerous trip, he can hire one of the smuggling syndicates to transport the gems.
For approximately $80, a courier will make the trip and meet the buyer in a Thai border town which brokers gem sales.

Once in Thailand, Myanmar smugglers, Thai brokers, and international buyers meet to sell gems.
Only known purchasers can do business there; strangers are not included in any serious transactions.
Most gems then go to Bangkok, where they are cut, treated, and sold to international purchasers.

Although Myanmar gems are embargoed by the United States, the reality is that it is almost impossible to spot a Myanmar gem or for customs agents to take any action to stem the flow.
Even in Thai border areas, Myanmar stones are mingled with gems from Africa, India, Cambodia, Australia, Thailand, and elsewhere.
There is no certificate of origin at this stage.
Once the stones have moved to Bangkok, they are further mingled.
This is where the certificate of origin or authenticity often appears.
By that time, only a practiced gemologist can offer an opinion on where the gemstone originated.

In many cases, stones are set in cheap metal settings in Bangkok so they can be brought in to the United States and other countries without attracting any attention from customs officers.
Again, the practice springs more from ignorance of the rules than a genuine need to avoid tariffs.
As one former customs agent put it, "People are idiots, and they like to think they’re doing something sneaky."

The culture surrounding gem mining, government attempts to control it, and individual attempts to avoid government control create a situation which almost assures that as long as gems are mined, some will be smuggled.
The deplorable economic conditions of many of the gem-producing countries exacerbate the problem, as do the almost complete inability on the part of customs officers to spot a smuggled stone, limited U.S. government resources, and lack of political will to stop illegal imports.
So, chances are that at some point along the line, some of those prized gems in your collection were smuggled.



####
document number 2: 
Recent Human Smuggling Cases Shine Light On Vermont-Canada Border




U.S. Border Patrol agent Richard Ross near the international border along Lake Memphremagog.




Over the first weekend in April, U.S. Border Patrol agents arrested 20 people for entering the country illegally in Vermont, New Hampshire and New York.

Helping people cross the border illegally — or human smuggling — is something people take for granted on the southern border between the U.S. and Mexico.
But it's also part of life on the northern border: Human smugglers and law enforcement are playing a cat-and-mouse game on the Vermont border.

Richard Ross is the Agent in Charge of the U.S. Border Patrol station in Newport, Vermont.

He's a native Vermonter who previously worked in borderland Texas.
Ross says the volumes are smaller and often the profiles are different.
But, he says, the human smuggling from Canada on the northern border is a constant.

"It absolutely is sophisticated and organized," said Ross.

Ross runs one of eight stations in the border patrol’s Swanton Sector.

It covers Vermont, five counties in New York and three counties in New Hampshire.
There's boundless tree cover within the sector, along with rivers and large lakes like Champlain and Memphremagog, with shoreline in both countries.

"If you have type of transnational criminal organization this area is very appealing," Ross said.

A series of cases helps chart the recent trajectory of human smuggling on the Vermont border.

In October, three people were charged in federal court with allegedly orchestrating a 15-person human smuggling attempt that used a Vermont motel as a way station.

In November, two Americans seen circling an area near the border were charged with smuggling two Mexicans.

Then in February and twice in March, border patrol agents intercepted similar smuggling attempts.

Two of the three cases unfolded beside the Haskell Free Library and Opera House in Derby Line, Vermont, which faces Stanstead, Quebec.
Outside the library, a street with a simple marker and some flower pots marks the border.
There's just enough room for a car to squeeze between the marker and the state of Vermont.

The international border between Quebec, on the right, and the U.S. in Derby Line, Vermont.
As the nation focuses on the southern border with Mexico, some people are concerned about the potential for terrorism coming to the U.S. from the northern border.


"We had two groups, that happened to be Romanian, drive vehicles," said Ross.
"So they came here, over the sidewalk, came up here up here took a left and I-91 is about a minute away," his hand retraced the direction of one of the cars.

The border patrol's work on the Canada border is a blend of art and science, looking at geography, at who might exploit a given part of the border or deportation orders in Canada that might spur more human smuggling into Vermont.

Unlike the southern border which can often have predictable seasonal ebbs and flows, it is difficult to anticipate numbers on the northern border.

Last year, agents in the Swanton Sector arrested 165 people trying to enter the U.S. illegally.
That’s a 22 percent decline over 2016 when 214 people were caught.
But Border Patrol intelligence agent Rob Dandrow says business is still good for human smugglers.

A set of empty flower pots marks the U.S.-Canada border at Haskell Free Library and Opera House where Derby Line, Vermont meets Stanstead, Quebec.


"These organizations can sometimes charge individuals anywhere from two to even upwards of $25,000- $30,000," explained Dandrow.

The cost in Mexico is far less, between $3,000 to $8,000 per person.
Dandrow says that intelligence gathering shows human smuggling operations need accomplices on both sides of the border.

"They will usually recruit drivers and foot guides whether it be in the U.S. and Canada, usually both countries, to actually do the physical smuggling themselves," Dandrow explained.

Agent Ross says they also use scouts.

"We'd be foolish to think that we're running our operations and they weren't running any against us to see where they could cross and when they could cross," said Ross.

Though privacy advocates are opposed, Canada has begun sharing data with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security on American citizens who cross into Canada largely in the name of border security.

It is expected that DHS will eventually reciprocate by sharing information on Canadians who cross into the U.S. Legislation in Canada would also establish exit controls.
Without them, the government says it has no reliable way of knowing if visitors ever leave the country.

David Berger is an immigration attorney who formerly served for 16 years in Canada's Parliament.
He says that eventually, people will be obligated to swipe their passport as they exit Canada.

"We will have a record of when they leave the country," Berger explained.
"We've never had that before.
And we will presumably share that information with the United States."

In Montreal, McGill University political scientist Philip Oxhorn says cross-border discussions on border issues can result in policy change.

"One of the reasons that Canada imposed visa requirements on Mexicans a few years ago was for that," he said referring to a decision by the previous Conservative government in 2009.
"The U.S. was saying it's too easy for Mexicans to come to Canada and go south through the Canadian border, so please impose the visa."

That visa requirement has been been lifted by the current ruling Liberal government.
There's been a rise in asylum applications by Mexicans to stay in Canada.
Canada typically rejects 50 percent of applications from Mexicans.

After the presidential election of November 2016, a number of people began entering Canada illegally from the United States.

Back in Vermont, Border Patrol Agent Richard Ross says agents are expecting a boomerang.

"Some of those folks have realized that they're not going to be allowed to stay in Canada," said Ross, "so we are seeing that traffic come back to us."

Canada has announced that it will allow a million immigrants into the country between now and 2020.
Not all will end up staying permanently.
Those who guard the northern border say that almost certainly means some of them will take their chances with human smugglers to try to enter the U.S.



####
document number 3: 
Georgia correctional officers accused of smuggling drugs in a Hot Pocket



Two Georgia correctional officers were arrested Monday after being accused of smuggling tobacco and drugs inside a popular frozen snack.

Investigators believe Calhoun State Prison correctional officers Corlethia Lattimore, 28, and Imani Ferguson, 21, stuffed methamphetamine and tobacco inside a Hot Pocket in order to get the drugs inside the prison, police told the WALB 10 news station.
Authorities discovered, by way of a metal detector, about 112 grams of meth inside a single Hot Pocket.


Lattimore, who lives in Edison, Georgia, was charged with drug trafficking and violation of oath of office.
She remains in the Calhoun County Sheriff’s Office jail.

Ferguson of Albany, Georgia, was charged with conspiracy, giving illegal substances to inmates and violation of oath of office.
She has been released on a $15,000 bond.

According to Calhoun County Sheriff Josh Hilton, almost a dozen prison employees at the prison in Morgan, Georgia, have been arrested for drug smuggling in the last year.



####
document number 4: 
Montenegrin Crime Boss Shot in Ukraine, Suspects Arrested





After a short but dramatic chase, Ukrainian authorities arrested on Wednesday four men for having tried to kill the alleged boss of a Montenegrin criminal clan that has been involved in a bloody war with a rival gang over control of cocaine smuggling from South America.

Arrest of suspects of an assassination attempt.
(Photo:


Police said they identified the badly injured victim as a Montenegrin national who is "wanted internationally as one of the leaders of a Montenegrin drug cartel" that supplies most of Europe with drugs.

The Chief of the National Police, Igor Klymenko, said that the four suspects arrested in Odessa were from North Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, and that one of them is "on the international wanted list for contract killing."

Police released a video of the assasination attempt made by surveillance cameras.
It shows the victim running by a parking lot and two men jumping out of a Mercedes Smart car and firing several shots at him.

The injured man can be seen escaping and the assassins taking off.
Another footage shows the killers getting out of the car, pouring some liquid on the seats and setting it on fire so fast that one of the men ran away as his clothes were burning on him.

The victim was immediately taken to the hospital.
Klymenko said that the perpetrators tried to escape and resisted the arrest.
He never revealed the identity of the victim or the suspects.

OCCRP partner KRIK, however, identified the person injured in Kyiv as Radoje Zvicer, the alleged leader of the Kavač criminal clan which has been fighting another clan called Škaljari.

Zvicer, as OCCRP, Krik and MANS reported earlier this month, is the most mysterious leader of the Kavač clan.
Reporters have only been able to find one photograph of him, and there is very little information available about his criminal or personal life.

Both clans hail from Kotor, on Montenegro’s Adriatic coast.
They were once part of the same gang smuggling drugs from South America, but split in 2014 after a cocaine deal in Spain went bad.
This created a violent rift that has deepened ever since and that has pulled in other Serbian and Montenegrin crime groups, according to the OCCRP/Krik/MANS investigation.

The assasination attempt was "part of a possible spat over redistribution of spheres of influence within the clan, or between the Balkan criminal clans that control the drug trafficking," the statement of the Ukrainian police said.

The police chief’s claims matched the OCCRP/KRIK/MANS Balkan Cocaine Wars report about the battle the two gangs are fighting over who will control the cocaine smuggling routes from South America and feed Europe’s 5.7 billion-euro-a-year habits.

The suspects arrived in Ukraine in early May, according to Klymenko, obtained vehicles, weapons and started surveilling the target, which local security cameras recorded.

Police said they established the route the assassins took to escape, heading towards the border to Moldova over Odessa, where they were arrested.



####
document number 5: 
Bloomberg Business, Donna Wilson, Clayton Neville discussed on 24 Hour News


Automatic TRANSCRIPT


The first smuggling incident happened Sunday at the interstate thirty five checkpoint when agents were inspecting eighteen

Wheeler

and found sixty five people in the back of it temperatures in the trailer were reportedly hunter than ninety degrees.
But no one.
Sicker.
Hurt a day later.
Another smuggling attempt busted at the same checkpoint.
Forty nine people were in a refrigerated trailer.
No one was hurt last year.
Ten illegal immigrants were found dead in the back of an eighteen Wheeler in

San Antonio

, authorities constantly warning of the dangers and of strict enforcement, I'm

Clayton Neville

.
He would have been used time.
One twenty five it's time for business.

Donna Wilson

from Bloomberg business.
You an stunts raging higher ahead of the

Federal Reserve

's ranked decision this afternoon.
The Dow is up seventy seven points to twenty six thousand five sixty eight as five hundred up eight points, the NASDAQ climbing thirty four points

Texas

intermediate crude is down the half of a percent to seventy one ninety one a barrel.

Papa John

's international shares a higher on a CNBC report that found a

John Schneider

as reached down to private equity firms to discuss partnering for buyout out of the pizza chain.
However, several PE firms are said to have turned him down due to potential.
Oh reputational risks from partnering with him US purchases of new homes rebounded in August.
From the slowest pace and almost a year a potential sign of stabilizing in the market Cording to government, data single-family home sales, rose three and a half percent.
I'm Donna Wilson, Bloomberg business, but

KYW

NewsRadio business always twenty five fifty five after every hour would have be news time one twenty-six rowing.



####
document number 6: 
Inside North Korean Smuggling






####
document number 7: 
The Iranian Smugglers Trafficking Fuel Into Pakistan


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


Trucks gather near the border to unload their cargo.
Pack animals will carry the fuel across.
Aslan works at a fuel depot in Pakistan.
He is just 12 years old.
Smugglers load donkeys and mules with fuel to cross the border.
Abdowahed has a bachelor's degree in agriculture but turned to fuel smuggling after drought dried up his orchards in the province of Sistan and Baluchistan.
He takes a bath in a spring near the Pakistan border after selling a load of diesel.

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from WIRED, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 8: 
Smuggling Weed Across the U.S.–Canadian Border


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


The sun was setting as we drove through the crisp July evening in Madison’s dad’s 1985 Volvo station wagon.
Summer was already cooling down up in the Great White North.
We’d just spent the best weekend of our lives at the Winnipeg Folk Festival in Canada, dancing in the mud, flirting with boys and buying legal beer for the first time.
Turns out, Lucky Lager tastes like the best craft beer money can buy when you’re 18.
I wasn’t a bad kid in high school.

IN THIS EPISODE


Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from OZY, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 9: 
Iran's Tankers and Its Smuggling Tactics


Smuggling in Persia goes back to ancient times, but the Islamic Republic has become increasingly adept at illicit trafficking in oil since the United States re-imposed economic sanctions in November 2018.
Iran’s single largest source of revenue is from oil exports; by mid-2019, 70 percent of its income was from petroleum products.
Iran has used its fleet of 54 oil tankers—the second largest state-owned fleet in the world—as a tool to game sanctions to continue selling its oil.

An Iranian oil tanker approaching Rotterdam in the Netherlands in 2007


Iran’s tanker fleet is vulnerable to attacks and sabotage.
On October 11, Iranian state media

reported

that the Sabiti, a tanker owned by the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC), was struck by missiles in the Red Sea.
Saheb Sadeghi, the NITC head of public relations, said the missiles were "possibly" fired from Saudi territory.
But the National Iranian Oil Company later dismissed that possibility.
The Sabiti was reportedly 60 miles from the Saudi port of Jeddah when it was hit.

The Sabiti stopped transmitting its position in August near the Iranian port city of Bandar Abbas.
Its transmissions resumed on October 11, shortly after the incident.
Iranian crews have often turned off their ships’ transponders to evade detection and illicitly sell oil.
The Sabiti had previously delivered one million barrels of oil to Syria, according to Tanker Trackers in September 2019.
Iran’s sale of oil to Syria violated E.U. sanctions against the Assad regime and U.S. sanctions on Iran’s oil industry.


#Oil leakage from Iranian Suezmax #tanker #Sabiti is under control and there was no fire on the vessel, owner National Iranian Tanker Company said in a statement | https://t.co/7dZt7KJFHg 📷: #NITC pic.twitter.com/R83xRqAq7i — Platts Oil (@PlattsOil) October 11, 2019

Since 1995, Iran has faced three periods of sanctions on its petroleum industry:

First round: In 1995, the United States banned all American involvement with petroleum development in Iran.
In August 1996, U.S. Congress passed the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act that imposed tough penalties on companies found investing more than $20 million a year in Iran’s oil and gas industry.
Foreign companies suspended contracts in Iranian oil and gas fields and deferred bidding on new investments.
The National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) had to offer greater incentives to negotiate contracts for supplies formerly sold to U.S. companies.
But the sanctions had limited short-term effect on Iran’s economy.

Second round: In 2010, during the Obama administration, U.S. Congress passed the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act, which targeted firms investing in Iran’s energy sector or selling refined petroleum to Tehran.
The law also imposed sanctions on foreign banks conducting business with Iran.
In June 2010, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1929, which tightened sanctions on foreign companies aiding Iran’s nuclear program.
In 2012, the European Union implemented a set of targeted sanctions that banned the import, purchase and transport of Iranian crude oil and petroleum projects.
It also froze the assets of Iran’s Central Bank in the European Union at a time that E.U. countries imported 20 percent of Iran’s oil.
International sanctions were lifted in 2016, six months after a nuclear deal with the world’s six major powers limited Iran’s nuclear program.

Third round: In November 2018, the Trump administration re-imposed sanctions six months after withdrawing from the 2015 nuclear deal.
The Europeans, China and Russia—the other partners to the deal—continued to honor its terms.
The United States granted temporary six-month waivers to a few countries—China, India, South Korea, Turkey, Taiwan, Malaysia, South Africa, Singapore and Sri Lanka—that had long depended on Iranian energy.
The waivers were lifted in May 2019, when the United States launched its "maximum pressure" campaign to cut Iran’s oil exports down to zero.
The Trump administration also threatened to sanction any foreign company or country that dared to buy from Iran.

Tehran soon struggled to find buyers for its oil.
Traditional customers, such as South Korea, halted purchases of Iranian crude.
Chinese companies appeared more hesitant to do business with Iran for fear of financial penalties.
In June 2019, China imported only 210,000 barrels per day (bpd) of Iranian crude—the lowest in nearly a decade and 60 percent below imports from Iran in June 2018.
Iran’s oil exports plummeted, from a high of 3.2 million bpd in 2016 (after the first round of sanctions ended) to a low of 160,000 bpd in August 2019—down 87 percent from 2016.

Tehran has employed four tactics to circumvent sanctions so it can continue to peddle its oil:

It has stored oil on its tanker fleet at sea while it searched for potential buyers willing to risk U.S. sanctions.


It has disguised its ships—by renaming them while at sea, reflagging them under other countries, and changing the unique identification codes—to evade international tracking systems.


It has reportedly turned off transponders required by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to monitor ship movements.


It has conducted discrete ship-to-ship transfers of oil by turning off the transponders on its tankers.
Iranian ships used offshore transfers to covertly deliver its oil to ships owned by countries including China and Syria.



Iran has bragged about beating the sanctions regime.
"If there is an art that we have perfected in Iran, and we can teach it to others for a price, it is the art of evading sanctions," Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif said, in December 2018, at the Doha Forum.
Between May 2 and September 10, 2019, at least a dozen Iranian oil tankers delivered crude oil to China, Syria, and Turkey.

Iran’s Tanker Fleet


The National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) transports Iranian crude exports on behalf of the National Iranian Oil Company.
The NITC began operations in 1955 with one 35,000-ton tanker.
In the early 1970s, it became the 19th largest oil company in the world, comparable to other medium-sized companies—Italy’s ENI or private U.S. companies such as the Atlantic Richfield Company and Occidental.
The NITC expanded its operations to keep up with Iran’s increasing oil exports.
By 1974, the fleet included four tankers.

In 1987, at the peak of the so-called Tanker War between Iran and Iraq, Tehran had a total fleet of 17 tankers.
During the conflict, Iraq attacked tankers ferrying Iranian oil, mainly at the northern end of the Gulf.
One ship, the 176,000-ton tanker Dena, was attacked by Iraq five separate times between 1984 and 1987.
The war made it difficult for Iran to transport oil cheaply because of increased insurance rates on Iranian cargo.
As a result, Tehran increasingly relied on its national fleet.


In 2012, Iran purchased 12 additional supertankers from Chinese shipyards, which expanded its fleet from 39 to 51 tankers.
Iran’s total shipping capacity increased from 61.5 million barrels to 85.5 million barrels.
By 2019, Iran had 54 tankers, including 38 very large crude carriers, or VLCCs, and eight Suezmaxes, according to Lloyd’s List Intelligence.
It had a total shipping capacity of 14.1 million tons, or 102 million barrels, the NITC reported.

Since 2018, Tehran has been dependent on its large fleet to export oil as international tanker companies cut back on transporting its petroleum products due to the difficulty in getting insurance to carry Iranian cargo.
After the United States re-imposed sanctions in 2018, Iran used its fleet in two different ways— to ship to buyers and to store oil for future sales.
In March 2019, Iran used 12 tankers, over a fifth of its fleet, for floating storage of unsold stocks, according to MarineTraffic.
In August 2019, with exports plummeting, Iran needed only 42 of its tankers to ship oil.

Before sanctions, Tehran leased idle vessels to major oil companies.
Between 2015 and 2017, the brief window when U.S. sanctions were lifted, the NITC signed 215 contracts to lease its tankers.
The contracts were either for single voyages or time-charter agreements, which permit companies to charter ships for a set period of time.
Tankers were leased to France’s Total, Royal Dutch Shell, Spain's Cepsa, Dutch energy firm Vitol, Hanwha Total of South Korea, India's Essar, Turkish refiner Tupras, and China's CNPC.
Many of these companies terminated contracts with the NITC after the Trump administration reinstated sanctions on Iran’s shipping industry in November 2018.

In 2019, Tehran faced another problem: It needed to modernize its aging oil tanker fleet; 16 of Iran’s 54 tankers were at least 19 years old, according to international shipping records.
Oil tankers typically have a lifespan of around 15 years to 20 years in the industry.
In November 2019, Brian Hook, the U.S. Special Representative for Iran, described Tehran’s ageing tanker fleet as a "floating liability."
U.S. sanctions crippled its ability to buy new ships.
Iran’s talks with South Korea about the purchase of 10 new supertankers were delayed by U.S. sanctions.
An Iranian official said that Tehran was looking at "all options," which included finding new ships in Vietnam and Greece.

Ownership of the NITC has been murky.
It was originally run by the state under both the monarchy and the theocracy.
It was privatized in 2000 after a consortium of three Iranian pension funds purchased its shares.
But Western officials claimed that the company was still tied to the regime.
The privatization was purportedly a fictional scheme to shield NITC from sanctions.

The Wandering Tanker



Iran’s Oil Tanker Adrian Darya Reaches Destination: Spokesman https://t.co/qoTebdHUkq pic.twitter.com/f6FM9AhTgB — Iran Front Page (@IranFrontPage) September 8, 2019


In 2019, the Adrian Darya-1—originally named the Grace 1—became the most infamous case of tanker deception.
The United States accused Iran of transporting 2.1 million barrels of crude for the financial gain of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), which had been separately sanctioned.
As the Grace 1, the tanker was originally flagged as a Panamanian vessel; it was seized by Gibraltar on July 4.
British authorities claimed the ship was attempting to smuggle oil to Syria in violation of E.U. sanctions on Syria.
Iran denied the claim but refused to name the buyer.

Gibraltar released the oil tanker on August 15, after Tehran provided written guarantees that the ship would not deliver oil to Syria.
On August 18, the Grace 1 changed its name to the Adrian Darya-1 and raised an Iranian flag before departing the Gibraltar port.
After its release, the tanker wandered the Mediterranean as Iran looked for a buyer and a location to offload its oil.

The tanker changed its destination several times between August 15 and September 3.
Its first destination was listed as Kalamata, Greece, but the Greek government said it had no contact with the ship, nor did it have the capacity to host a tanker.
The ship then headed for Iskenderun, Turkey, but it went dark off the coast of Syria.
On September 8, Iran’s foreign ministry announced that it had finally sold the tanker’s oil but did not name the buyer.
The ship was tracked off the coast of Tartus, Syria.
Britain claimed that Iran had sold the cargo to Syria.


WE NOW HAVE VISUAL CONFIRMATION The #AdrianDarya1 is still fully laden and sitting in the anchorage of Baniyas.
Again, won't be able to deliver to either Baniyas or Tartous without offloading a million barrels via a Ship-to-Ship transfer first.
Captured by @planetlabs #OOTT pic.twitter.com/sq6lB0n7MX — TankerTrackers.com, Inc.
⚓️🛢 (@TankerTrackers) September 28, 2019

Smuggling Tactics


When Washington blocked one route Iran used to export oil, Tehran found another.
"In future months, the Americans themselves will see that we will continue our oil exports," Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said in April 2019.

Going "Dark"


Tankers are equipped with an Automatic Identification System or A.I.S. that continuously broadcasts their location.
An International Maritime Organization treaty, overseen by the United Nations, requires all ships of 300 tons or more to turn on their A.I.S. when traveling international routes.
The system was designed to avoid collisions and aid in search-and-rescue operations.
It also allows local maritime authorities to monitor traffic around their border using on-shore receivers.
In 2012, ships smuggling Iranian oil began turning off tracking signals and stopped reporting positions when they neared ports to mitigate buyers’ anxieties.
In 2012, only seven of Iran’s 25 supertankers operated on-board transponders.
The rest of the fleet traveled in stealth mode.

Between May and August 2019, at least six Iranian ships turned off their A.I.S. transponders when crossing the Suez Canal to hide their positions before they offloaded cargo in Syria and Turkey,

The New York Times

reported.
Each tanker reemerged with a change in draft, the measurement of a ship’s depth in the water.
In all six cases, the Iranian tanker left the Eastern Mediterranean riding lighter, which indicated that the ship had unloaded its cargo.
During the same period, at least six other Iranian ships were tracked using similar tactics for covert deliveries to China.

Reflagging and Renaming


Under international maritime law, merchant ships must be registered with a country.
Tehran has registered the majority of its ships under flags of convenience, including countries such as Panama, Bolivia, Liberia, Togo, and Tanzania.
These states maintain an open registry, which allows ship owners to register vessels without ties to the country.
Most flags have nationality or residency requirement for ship registration.
Countries that offer so-called flags of convenience typically have lax shipping regulations conducive to smuggling operations.

Some countries removed Iran’s tankers from their registries after the United States tightened sanctions.
Between January and July 2019, Panama delisted over 50 Iranian tankers.
Iran was forced to relist ships under its own flag, which in turn led foreign companies to be less willing to accept deliveries.
Foreign maritime officials were also more likely to search ships with an Iranian flag.

To disguise ship identities, Iran also reflagged some of its tankers on the open waters to add an extra layer of protection to smuggling operations.
Once a ship registers under the flag of a new country, that country’s laws apply to the vessel.
Each country is responsible for the activities of the ships flying its flag and must ensure they abide by international maritime law.
Reflagging tankers allowed Tehran plausible deniability for smuggling oil and breaking sanctions under the cover of foreign flags.

Iran also changed the names of its tankers to confuse global ship-monitoring systems.
Iranian ships engaged in smuggling regularly changed their names—notably the Grace 1 became the Adrian Darya 1—to obfuscate illicit activities.
In September 2019, Iran changed the names of three supertankers smuggling Iranian oil to China.
The Sea Dragon was renamed the Nexo; the Ming Zhu was renamed the Artemis; and the Gas Infinity was renamed the Echo Star, according to data from Kpler.
Each ship was assigned a unique IMO code, which made it possible for maritime intelligence companies to track the ships despite their name changes.

Ship-to-Ship Transfers


Iran used ship-to-ship transfers to conceal oil sales.
In the shipping industry, transfers are commonly used to break up large shipments into smaller cargoes.
Iran used the practice to transfer crude oil from its tankers—either stationed near a port or out at sea—to a non-Iranian vessel "to mask the fact that the true origin of the oil is from Iran and to introduce it into the global market as if it were non-Iranian oil," according to the U.S. Treasury.
The cargo, disguised as non-Iranian, was then sold to buyers.

In April 2019, Iran shipped as much as 300,000 bpd of oil using ship-to-ship transfers.
Large VLCC tankers linked to China’s National Petroleum Company reportedly conducted ship-to-ship transfers of Iranian crude off the coast of Malacca.
The oil cargo was then covertly delivered to China.

Offshore Storage


In 2019, Iran had insufficient on-shore space to store excess oil while searching for buyers, so it stored oil on large tankers that either sailed in circles around the Persian Gulf or docked in Iran’s territorial waters.
In August 2019, Iran’s tanker storage capacity was full, with more than 111 million barrels stockpiled offshore on 12 tankers, a fifth of its total fleet.
The large percentage of tankers devoted to storage reduced Iran’s export capacity.


International Maritime Coalition in the Persian Gulf


On July 22, the United States announced Operation Sentinel, an international maritime coalition to protect vital shipping routes in the Persian Gulf.
The Pentagon said the mission would be "to increase surveillance of and security in key waterways in the Middle East to ensure freedom of navigation" in the Gulf, through which roughly one-fifth of the world’s oil passes.
Britain also announced its own European-led "maritime protection mission" to safeguard international shipping lanes.
London claimed it would coordinate with the United States’ Operation Sentinel campaign but launched its own initiative to include European countries that would not contribute to a U.S.-led force.
On August 5, Britain formally said it would join the United States in a "new international maritime security mission" to protect shipping in the Persian Gulf.

The U.S. and British initiatives followed attacks on six foreign tankers between May and June outside the Strait of Hormuz in the Gulf of Oman.
Operation Sentinel will escort flagged vessels of participating nations in coordination with European, Asian and Middle Eastern allies.
The following countries have committed to work alongside or collaborate with the U.S.-led maritime mission: Australia, Bahrain, Britain, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.

Historical Cases


The following are documented cases of Iranian ships engaged in oil smuggling operations.
The dates given for each ship represent the period of illicit activity.

The Tour 2: March 2012 –April 2013

Iran

used

multiple deceptive tactics to cover the tracks of the Tour 2, which discreetly shipped oil to the Assad regime in Syria.
In 2007, Tehran

reflagged

the tanker from Iran to Malta; it also changed the tanker’s name from the Tour to the ISIM Tour to preemptively avoid U.S. sanctions.
In September 2008, the United States

announced

sanctions on Tehran’s shipping industry, which prompted Iran to use foreign front companies to mask ownership of its tanker fleet.
Tehran

used

a Maltese front company to disguise the Tour’s ownership and hide its connection to the Iranian government.
In April 2012, Iran again reflagged the tanker to Bolivia while it was carrying smuggled oil through the Suez Canal.
In June 2012, the ship appeared in a

report

by the U.N. Panel of Experts on Iran, which described specific instances of Iranian smuggling operations using its tanker fleet.
After the report, the Tour 2 was listed under different names and flags, including the Sierra Leone and the Togo, but it remained in the service of Iran.
The tanker

delivered

oil to the Assad regime at least three times between March 2012 and April 2013, according to the U.N. report.

The Iran Astaneh: July 2012

The Iran Astaneh was an Iranian oil tanker registered to the NITC.
In July 2012, Iran changed the vessel’s name to the Neptune to conceal its identity as an Iranian vessel and make finding a buyer easier.
The tanker was anchored off the coast of Bandar Abbas and served as a storage facility for hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian crude in the Persian Gulf.
In December 2013, the U.S. Treasury sanctioned the ship for its role in facilitating the illegal sale of Iranian oil.

The Millionaire: December 2012

The Millionaire was owned by the NITC but was flagged to Tanzania.
Iran programmed the tanker’s GPS system to send incorrect satellite signals that confused global tracking systems.
The falsified signals disguised the identity of the Millionaire as a Syrian-owned ship, the Lady Rasha.
The tactic was used to confuse tracking systems and conceal the vessel’s destination.
The Millionaire changed its MMSI—a code that provides information on a ship’s identity and position—to match the Lady Rasha’s number.
One international tracking signal showed the Millionaire sailing the Lady Rasha’s course through the Mediterranean.
Another satellite signal showed the tanker sailing though the Indian Ocean to sell its cargo in East Asia before returning to Iran.

Timeline


1908

Oil was discovered in Khuzestan province in the southwest of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The Masjid-i-Solaiman was the country’s first oil well.
It was also the first well in the Middle East.

1912

The Anglo-Persian Oil Company built the Abadan oil refinery on the Persian Gulf.
At the time, it was one of the largest oil refineries in the world and significantly increased Iranian crude oil production.

1920s

Iran became one of the top five oil producers in the world.
It accounted for five to six percent of global production.

1951

Tehran nationalized the oil industry after a series of disputes between the Iranian government and Anglo Iranian Oil Company, which had been administered by the British government.
Tehran formed the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) to manage its oil exports.

1955

The National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) began operations with one 35,000-ton tanker.
The NITC was formed to transport Iranian crude exports on behalf of the NIOC.

1974

The NITC had a total fleet of four tankers.

1979 Revolution


1984 – 1988 Iran-Iraq Tanker War

In 1980, Iraq invaded Iran.
Saddam Hussein wanted to take advantage of the chaos following Iran’s revolution and weaken his top regional rival.
Iraq attacked Iranian ships in the northern Persian Gulf starting in 1981, but Iran did not respond with similar attacks for three years.
The so-called Tanker War was launched in March 1984 by Iraq’s airstrike on Iran’s Kharg Island oil terminus and several Iranian ships.
Two months later, Iran began to target ships ferrying oil for Iraq.
Between 1984 and 1988, a total of 451 ships were hit in the Gulf.

1987

At the peak of the war, Tehran had a total fleet of 17 tankers.
The war made it difficult for Iran to transport oil cheaply because of increased insurance rates on Iranian cargo.
As a result, Tehran increasingly relied on its national fleet.

1996

Aug.
5 - The U.S. Congress passed the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act to deter foreign investment in Iran’s energy sector.
The act imposed tough penalties on companies found investing more than $20 million a year in Iran’s oil and gas industry.

2010

June 9 – The U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1929 which tightened proliferation-related sanctions on Iran.
It banned Tehran from testing missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads and imposed an embargo on the transfer of major weapons systems to Iran.
Major players in Iran’s energy sector were liable to be sanctioned for supporting nuclear or ballistic missile development.

June 24 – The U.S. Congress passed the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act, which targeted firms investing in Iran’s energy sector or selling refined petroleum to Tehran.
It also imposed sanctions on foreign banks conducting business with Iran.

2012

Iran purchased 12 additional supertankers from Chinese shipyards, which expanded its fleet from 39 to 51 tankers.

Jan.
23 – The European Union adopted a set of targeted sanctions that banned the import, purchase, and transport of Iranian crude oil and petroleum projects, effective July 1.
It also agreed to freeze the assets of Iran’s central bank in the European Union.
E.U. countries imported 20 percent of Iran’s oil at the time.

July 12 – The United States first designated the NITC.
"The Treasury Department is also identifying today the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) as a Government of Iran entity and, for the first time, the NITC fleet and various front companies belonging to NITC," Treasury said in a press release.

Aug.
1 – The U.S. Congress passed The Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Human Rights Act.
It targeted companies conducting business with Iran’s national oil company and tanker fleet, such as insurers and shippers.

2016

The NITC owned 66 total oil tankers.
Its fleet was very old, with 21 tankers built in 2000 or earlier.

Jan.
16 – The 2015 nuclear deal went into its implementation phase.
The United States, European Union, and United Nations lifted or suspended certain sanctions.
Iran also regained access to the international financial system, repatriated billions of dollars in frozen assets abroad, and returned to the oil market.

2018

May 8 – President Trump announced the U.S. withdrawal from the 2015 nuclear deal, known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and reimposition of sanctions on Iran.
Britain, France and Germany moved to salvage the accord.
Iran stated its intent to continue with the deal if its economic benefits could be guaranteed.
Both China and Russia said they intended to observe the JCPOA and continue to trade with Iran.
Foreign companies began withdrawing from Iran rather than risk running afoul of U.S. sanctions.

2019

Iran’s fleet totaled at least 54 tankers, including 38 VLCCs and eight Suezmaxes, according to Lloyd’s List Intelligence.

April 22 – The United States announced that it would stop granting sanctions exemptions to eight countries that imported Iranian oil: India, China, Turkey, Italy, Greece, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan.
"We will continue to apply maximum pressure on the Iranian regime until its leaders change their destructive behavior, respect the rights of the Iranian people, and return to the negotiating table," said Secretary of State Mike Pompeo.
He noted that oil sales accounted for up to 40 percent of Iran’s revenue.
The Trump administration's stated goal was to bring Iranian exports down to zero.

Photo credits: Dena tanker in 2007 by AlfvanBeem [CC0], from Wikimedia Commons; Home page photo of Dena by AlvanBeem [CCO], from Wikimedia Commons



####
document number 10: 
Human trafficking: hundreds rescued in West Africa


LYON, France – Almost 220 victims of human trafficking have been rescued by police in Benin and Nigeria in an operation coordinated by INTERPOL.

The children were aged between 11 and 16, with the youngest rescued at the land border between Benin and Nigeria.


Some 100 officers across Benin and Nigeria carried out raids and identity checks at markets in Abuja and Cotonou.


/

A number of victims were also rescued from premises where they were forced into prostitution.

With a number of investigations ongoing, police arrested 47 people and seized vehicles, cash, mobile phones and computers.

Forced labour and exploitation

Evidence in the region shows that victims of trafficking are recruited and trafficked using deception and coercion, and held in bondage in various labour intensive activities.

Many of the 157 rescued minors were moved around as ‘merchandise’ themselves across the border, and made to work in markets all day, peddling goods, fetching water, cooking, carrying heavy loads, or working as housemaids.
Some were the victims of sexual exploitation.

The children were aged between 11 and 16, with the youngest rescued at the land border between Benin and Nigeria.

There police found a boy who had been forced to carry clandestinely between the two countries heavy goods such as bags of rice weighing up to 40 kg.

All the victims originated from Benin, Burkina Faso, Niger, Nigeria and Togo.

"This operation underlines the need for cross-border collaboration between law enforcement and all stakeholders to ensure that together we can enhance our prevention, protection and prosecution efforts," added the INTERPOL Chief.

Safeguarding the victims

Most of the minors endured beatings and psychological abuse, including death threats and warnings they would never see their parents again.

To ensure they received the necessary care following their rescue, social services and NGOs undertook post-operation interviews and provided support services to the victims.

In Benin, the minors were transferred to shelters, returned to their parents or taken into care by national social affairs authorities and NGOs.

Hounde Seidou, the Police Divisional Commissioner of Benin’s Central Bureau for the Protection of Minors and Families and the Prevention of Human Trafficking (OCPM) said: "Nobody belongs in the markets or on the streets as slave labourers.
As law enforcement officers it is our duty to combat human trafficking, especially when children are involved."

In Nigeria, the minors were taken in charge by NAPTIP, the National Agency for the Prohibition of Trafficking in Persons which works with NGOs.

Do Asogwa, Comptroller of Nigeria’s Immigration Service in the Seme border region said: "We have to cooperate with one another to combat the crime networks behind the trafficking and smuggling of human beings.
These crimes can only be tackled collectively and through interagency cooperation."

Empowering law enforcement

Building sustainable law enforcement capacity to investigate and handle cases of human trafficking and migrant smuggling is at the heart of INTERPOL’s strategy on vulnerable communities.

To this end, Operation Epervier II was preceded in Benin and Nigeria by specialized INTERPOL training exercises to help officers enhance their investigative techniques as well as victim and offender interview skills.

INTERPOL’s secure communications system I-24/7 was also deployed to operational hotspots, providing police with real-time access to criminal global databases containing millions of records, including on stolen and lost travel documents and biometrics.

With the G7 Interior Ministers meeting in Paris earlier this month calling for increased cooperation with INTERPOL against crimes such as human trafficking, the operation was undertaken under the framework of the INTERPOL Global Task Force on Human Trafficking.

It was funded by the INTERPOL Foundation for a Safer World.



####
document number 11: 
America’s First Multimillionaire Got Rich Smuggling Opium


When business legend John Jacob Astor died in 1848, he was hailed as a titan of trade and praised as a sharp salesman with a taste for philanthropy.
"There are few men whose biography would prove more instructive or more acceptable for the present age than the life of John Jacob Astor,"gushed one magazine in his obituary.

But today, one facet of the first multi-millionaire’s biography might seem to tarnish his shining legacy: his dabbling in smuggled opium.
Astor’s enormous fortune was made in part by sneaking opium into China against imperial orders.
The resulting riches made him one of the world’s most powerful merchants—and also helped create the world’s first widespread opioid epidemic.

Born in Germany, Astor’s enterprising spirit took him abroad when he was just 18.
He ended up in the United States at a time when the country was in the midst of a new love affair with China.

As Astor began to sell furs in New York, he kept tabs on America’s new China trade.
The country had a longstanding obsession with Chinese goods, especially the tea that had fueled revolutionary sentiment against the United Kingdom.
During British rule, American trade was under England’s thumb, and the East India Company had a monopoly on trade with China.
The Revolutionary War changed that, and the new United States, now free of the monopoly, could trade freely with China.
American ships began to sail directly to Canton, and the flow of commerce that followed made millionaires out of the intrepid men who plunged into the trade.

Astor began to import Chinese tea and silks—and to flirt with another way to get in on the trade boom.

"The China trade was an early engine of American investment,"notes Eric Jay Dolin for

The Daily Beast

.
The merchants who became millionaires thanks to commerce with China also became philanthropists—but there was a downside.
"These American fortunes, and all their good works…must be weighed against the damage that was done in acquiring them," writes Dolin.

That damage took the form of drugs—namely, opium.
Since there wasn’t much demand in China for western goods, England and the United States made up for it by providing something that was.
They used the profits from opium to purchase tea, pottery and fabrics that they’d resell back home.
This also allowed merchants to get around a big technical challenge: an international shortage of silver, the only currency the Chinese would take.

Opium was technically banned in China, but merchants like Astor found a way around the ban.
Large ships containing gigantic hauls of opium met small vessels outside of legitimate ports and swiftly unloaded their illicit cargo.
Bribery was common and officials who had taken bribes looked the other way instead of enforcing anti-opium laws.

Astor knew that British ships usually smuggled in premium opium from India, but he wanted to get a foothold in the opium trade.
For his first salvo, he purchased 10 tons of Turkish opium in 1816.
The quality wasn’t as high as Indian opium, but it was still in demand: dealers cut Indian opium with their Turkish supply.
Astor shipped the opium to China in exchange for goods that he resold in the United States.

It isn’t clear how much opium Astor sold during his years as a drug smuggler, and the business was just a lucrative sideline to his even more profitable fur trade.
But Astor is thought to have sold hundreds of thousands of pounds of opium between 1816 and 1825, when he stepped away from the China trade for good.
According to historian John Kuo Wei Tchen, Astor even brought opium to New York, openly selling it and evenadvertising it in New York newspapers.

By selling opium, Astor was satisfying an international craving that would reach epidemic proportions during the 19th century.
Opium use became rampant in China, where 3 million people smoked opium in the 1830s.
By 1890, a full 10 percent of China’s population smoked opium.
In a bid to curb opium use, imperial China banned producing or consuming the drug, even executing dealers andforcing users to wear heavy wooden collars and endure beatings.

Smugglers like Astor fed that demand without taking on too much risk; as Frederic Delano Grant, Jr. notes, American smugglers overlooked the consequences of the trade.
"Perhaps the opium traders’ inability to see most Chinese as other than menials or curiosities helped them keep faceless the hundreds of thousands of Chinese who craved the drug they sold,"writes Grant.

Astor wasn’t the only American to make his fortune in part through opium smuggling: Warren Delano, Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s father, made millions engaging in what hecalled a "fair, honorable and legitimate" trade.

Opium smoking and injection of opium derivatives like morphine created hardcore drug users in England and the United States, but the main toll of opium use in the West was felt among casual users who started using opium under doctor’s orders.
Opium use was socially acceptable and medically approved in some forms, and could be found in patent medicines prescribed for everything from pain to depression.

This led to widespread addiction and became, in effect, America’s first opioid epidemic.
In 1859,

Harper’s Magazine

wrote of "glassy eyes in Fifth Avenue drawing-rooms and opera-stalls" and "permanently stupefied" babies—all people who took or were given opium in prescription or over-the-counter form.
It would take until the late 19th century for American doctors to curb their prescriptions of opium derivatives to patients.

By then, opium abuse had devastated China and caused two wars.
Astor, long since dead, had passed his fortune on to a family that became a Gilded Age fixture and dominated New York philanthropy and high society.

Astor’s reputation didn’t suffer from the trade—though it was illegal in China, Astor conducted his drug deals openly.
But by participating in the opium trade in the early 1800s, he helped create a system that fueled addiction worldwide—and made millions while he was at it.



####
document number 12: 
Don Henry Ford: A Smuggler's Story, Part 1


MADELEINE BRAND, host:

This is DAY TO DAY.
I'm Madeleine Brand.

And today we begin a personal story we'll tell over the next three days.
It's about crime, punishment and possibly redemption.
The storyteller is radio producer Scott Carrier; the subject of the story, a man named Don Henry Ford.

Mr. DON HENRY FORD (Convicted Drug Smuggler): I wasn't trying to hurt anybody.
I didn't want to hurt anybody.
And it might've been crazy thinking, but I actually thought I was helping people, you know?
I knew the law said it was illegal and bad, but I didn't share that sentiment.

SCOTT CARRIER reporting:

He's like an old, sad wolf, blue eyes that burn yellow around the pupils, deep lines of sorrow furrowed in his brow.
He looks at you without moving, perfectly still.
And there's this feeling of gravity, the stab of a broken heart followed by the thought, `This man would be very hard to kill.'

Mr.
FORD: I looked at the world and looked at people that had legitimate jobs and all the trappings of society, and it looked like a bunch of rats trapped in a maze to me.
You know, everybody owed the bank, and they had to go to work to do this stuff, and they had that, and this constant--so, for me, my goal for having money was just to be free from all that.

CARRIER: During the '70s and '80s, Don Henry Ford smuggled thousands of pounds of Mexican marijuana into the United States.
He started out small, carrying loads on his back across the Rio Grande River and crawling through bushes to avoid the cops.
Then he bought a van and installed enough hidden compartments to carry 200 pounds of pot he'd buy from guerrilla growers in the mountains, small villages without electricity or running water.

Mr.
FORD: You could go down with $20,000 to Durango, pay all your expenses, kind of make a vacation out of it and come back and turn that into about $120,000.

CARRIER: Huh.
What'd you do with the money?

Mr.
FORD: I blew a lot of it.
I was pretty generous with whores and friends.

(Soundbite of laughter)

Mr.
FORD: I can remember sticking $3,000 in a girl's pocket when she walked by just because she looked good.

(Soundbite of music)

CARRIER: Some of these facts can't be checked, but I do know the DEA records on Don Henry match his story.
And I can say that when Don Henry tells me he was a good outlaw, I believe him.
He says he never carried a gun, never threatened anyone.
When people pointed guns at him, he found a way to become their friend.
When the Mexican authorities stopped him, he told them in fluent Spanish that, yes, he was smuggling marijuana, but surely there must be a way to take care of this without anyone going to jail.
And when the American cops stopped him, he played the good ol' boy Texas redneck because that's what he is.

Mr.
FORD: I was very confident around cops.
I felt like I could manipulate and play with most of them.
I was almost belligerent about it.
I just didn't think I had anything to hide, and I was pretty confident about it.
And, I don't know, I was able to look them right in the face and say, `Yeah, I smoke it.
So what?'
You know?

CARRIER: By the mid-'80s, Don Henry says he was grossing over $1 million a year and partially supporting the economy of a small, very remote Mexican village named Piedritas in the mountains of northern Coahuila, where he bought most of his merchandise.
He had a partner there named Oscar.
And Oscar was like the godfather of the village, organizing the farmers and distributing the money.

For a while things were good.
The people in the village had purchasing power for the first time in their lives.
Don Henry was their hero.
Then Oscar decided it would be a smart thing to go into business with a druglord.
He said that druglords had huge plantations, thousands of acres that produced a higher-quality marijuana, packaged in a uniform manner, and there was no end to it.
So they arranged a meeting with a druglord in Torreon, Coahuila.
Oscar and Don Henry checked into a motel on the outskirts of town.

Mr.
FORD: And we waited, and we waited some more--couple of days.
And I told Oscar I was becoming uncomfortable with it.
Well, he invited me to a bar.
And there were all these big, fat men sitting around with .45s on their belts and whooping and hollering.
And they were introduced to me as the Mexican police.
And there was back-slapping going on and everything is OK.
And, of course, you know, I smiled and agreed, `Yeah, if it's OK with you, then it must be OK.'
And I actually expressed concern.
`Don't worry.
Who's going to bust you?
We're the cops.
We run things down here.
You have nothing to fear.'

About 3 or 4 in the morning--I don't know exactly when--there was a real loud bang at the door.
And one guy just stepped right into the door and went down to his knee and pointed an automatic rifle of some sort directly at my chest.
I was totally naked.
And I said, `Have you talked to Oscar?'
And he said, `Which Oscar?'
And I said, `You know, Oscar.'
And he said, `Well, follow me.'
So we walked down to the room where Oscar was staying, and I opened the door.
And there was a little man with an Uzi in hand standing on Oscar's back.
And he had been kicking him in the side repeatedly, apparently, with these riding boots, the heel of the boots in the rib, to the point where he had a welt about the size of a half of a softball or grapefruit--blue and red and ugly.

Well, they continued to beat and torture Oscar in front of me for a while.
For some reason, though, they didn't beat me.
They beat up Oscar in front of me instead.

CARRIER: It took Oscar three weeks to recover from the beating they gave him.
And you'd think this would have maybe made Don Henry realize it was time to get out of the business, but it didn't.

(Soundbite of song)

Unidentified Band: (Singing) And who by a fire, who by our watches, who in sunshine, who in the nighttime, who by high ordeals, who by common trust, who in your merry, merry month of May, who by a very slow decay, and who shall I say is calling?

BRAND: The story of Don Henry Ford as told by Scott Carrier continues tomorrow when Don Henry learns an important lesson in drug smuggling that no amount of pot is worth dying for.

(Soundbite of song)

Unidentified Band: (Singing) And who by a fire, who by our watches and who shall I say is calling?

BRAND: Stay with us as DAY TO DAY continues.

Copyright © 2005 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 13: 
Drug traffickers are recruiting smugglers on Facebook


You can do just about anything on Facebook, including hiring drug mules.


Two American citizens who were recently caught smuggling large quantities of illegal narcotics from Mexico into the United States said they had been recruited through job ads posted on Facebook.

One, a 33-year-old woman arrested at a California border crossing last month with 37 kilos of cocaine in her car, said she was recruited through a Facebook ad that promised "an opportunity to make money."
The other, a California man found with 67 kilos of meth and 5.6 kilos of cocaine when he attempted to drive across the border in April, also said he had answered an ad on Facebook which was soliciting "people looking for work."

It’s not clear what exactly the postings contained, and whether they were paid ads or regular posts.
However, the cases show that such transactions often don’t happen on the dark web or a crime-ridden street corner, but on the social network millions of people use every day.
Facebook is unique in that it gives individual users instant access to nearly anyone, is easy to use, and is difficult to monitor.

The cases, which were discovered among dozens of federal search warrant applications obtained by Quartz, demonstrate how difficult it is for the social networking giant to police illicit activity, and how easy it is for bad actors to co-opt the platform for their own nefarious purposes.

"An opportunity to make money"


It was shortly before 10:30am on June 18 when Priscilla Gonzalez approached the San Ysidro Port of Entry in her own 2016 Honda Civic.

As she waited in line to cross into the States, a US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) drug-detection dog "alerted to the rear passenger door of the vehicle," explains an affidavit filed by federal investigators.

Gonzalez was sent to secondary screening, where her car was X-rayed.
CBP officers found 32 packages of cocaine in the vehicle—18 inside the doors and 14 inside the back seat—weighing a total of 36.9 kg (81.3 lbs).

After she was placed under arrest, Gonzalez, whose lawyer said in court her client had moved from Southern California to Rosarito, Mexico with her husband and two kids for financial reasons, was questioned by agents from the Department of Homeland Security.
Gonzalez told them she responded to a Facebook ad promising a way to earn cash.
She said she was instructed to drop off her car at an auto repair shop in Mexico, then drive it into the United States.

Gonzalez claimed someone was supposed to contact her on Facebook Messenger and direct her to a drop-off spot after she crossed the border.
She said was expecting payment of $3,000 for the round trip.

"Candy and wallets"


Two months earlier, officers at the same US border crossing encountered a nearly identical situation.

When Saul Leal pulled up to the San Ysidro Port of Entry in a green Nissan Xterra on April 16, he told officers he was headed to work in Otay Mesa, an area of San Diego that abuts the Mexican border.

Like Gonzalez, a CBP K9 alerted officials to something suspicious in Leal’s car as he sat in line.
He was referred to secondary inspection, where the vehicle was X-rayed.
Officers "observed anomalies in the spare tire, front seats, and both quarter panels," according to an affidavit filed in federal court.
A vehicle search turned up 55 vacuum-sealed packages of methamphetamine, weighing a total of 30.5 kg (67.2 lbs), and five vacuum-sealed packages of cocaine, weighing a combined 5.6 kg (12.3 lbs).

"Leal stated that he was looking for a job in the San Diego area on Facebook," according to a sworn statement filed in federal court by the DHS agent who questioned him.
"Leal contacted someone on Facebook who was looking for workers to transport candy and wallets from Mexico to the United States."

Leal said he then met up with someone named "Tomas," who introduced Leal to a man he called "Supervisor."
In exchange for regularly bringing the seemingly benign items into the US, Leal was promised a car, a cell phone, and $35 per trip.
He said he had been given the Xterra a couple of weeks earlier, court filings explain.

Although Leal was "initially reluctant to give details about Tomas and Supervisor," he eventually said he "suspected them of being involved in narcotics smuggling."
Leal confessed that Tomas upped the ante from $35 per trip to $5,000, if Leal agreed to smuggle money or people across the border into the US.
But Leal insisted that he refused the offer.

Leal, who said he had crossed the border about four times before being caught, explained that he tried to register the SUV under his own name to make things less conspicuous, but it failed a smog inspection.
Tomas claimed to have fixed it, and rode with Leal all the way to the San Ysidro crossing the day he was busted.

"Before getting out of the car Tomas told Leal that next time he will not be with him, however there will be a GPS tracker in the car until Tomas and the Supervisor can trust him," according to court records.
"Leal told agents he suspected that the car was loaded with something illegal and even gave his credit card to his wife in case he was arrested."

A platform for all—including drug cartels


Facebook, the world’s largest social network, and the company’s other properties, Messenger, Whatsapp and Instagram, provide a platform for planning and executing criminal schemes of various types—and have long been used by drug traffickers.

In 2016, a Southern California drug trafficker was caught using Facebook to coordinate the transport of "vast quantities" of methamphetamine into the United States.
Mexico’s notorious Jalisco drug cartel has reportedly groomed hit men by posting fake job ads on Facebook, forcing those who applied to attend military-style training camps against their will.
Cartels also use Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube for extortion, while human smugglers use Facebook to coordinate their activities and advertise their services.

Drug dealers, meanwhile, have repeatedly used Facebook and Instagram to promote and sell their products.
(Facebook is also frequently used as a modern-day newspaper jobs section, which has also landed the company in trouble, when advertisers were using its algorithms to discriminate against job candidates based on age.)

In the past, Facebook has made the argument that it is not liable for content on its website under US law.
But, the platform prohibits content that promotes or attempts to coordinate criminal activity, a company spokesperson told Quartz.
Ads must also adhere to those rules, and are specifically not allowed to promote illegal activities.
Ads are monitored just like regular content, the spokesperson said.

Facebook also cooperates with law enforcement, responding to subpoenas and warrants.
Last year, the company also stepped up its efforts to limit drug sales, especially opioids, including developing AI that detects potential drug sales on the platform.

Despite all this, there are still plenty of things that manage to slip by.

Gonzalez is currently free on $30,000 bond, and was ordered to surrender her passport.
Reached by email, Gonzalez’s attorney declined to comment on the case.
She is due back in court on Aug.
19.

Leal also pleaded not guilty and is free on $30,000 bond, as well.
His attorney, Robert Rexrode, did not respond to a request for comment.
Leal’s next court date is scheduled for Sept.
9.



####
document number 14: 
Wachovia Now Off the Hook for Role in Mexican Drug Cartels' Money Laundering Scheme


Happy Anniversary, Wachovia!

A year after the bank admitted to handling hundreds of millions in Mexican drug money -- and paid $160 million in fines and penalties -- the company is now off the hook for further punishment.

According to the British paper the

Guardian

, government documents also show the Magic City played a central role in the money-laundering operation.
Like a true junkie, it seems Miami just can't quit the drug scene.

In March 2010, Wachovia promised to fork over $110 million for approving transactions later proved to be connected to drug smuggling.
The DEA and IRS also hit the bank with a $50 million fine after funds from its accounts were used to ship 22 tons of cocaine.

"Wachovia's blatant disregard for our banking laws gave international cocaine cartels a virtual carte blanche to finance their operations," Jeffrey Sloman, U.S. Attorney for the Southern District said at the time.
"[They] laundered at least $110 million in drug proceeds."

The feds built their case around Wachovia's relationship with Mexican exchange banks called CDCs (or

casas de cambio

).
Bank execs knew as early as 1996 that the Mexican CDCs were hot spots for drug money but kept doing business with them anyway.

The penalties were announced at a news conference in Miami.
According to the

Guardian

, it was no coincidence.
Miami had played a central role in the Mexican cartels' money-laundering operation.

When Martin Woods, a senior anti-money laundering officer for Wachovia, complained to his higherups that the CDCs looked suspicious, bank execs in Miami blew him off.
It later turned out the suspect CDCs were supervised and managed by a business unit -- where else?
-- in Wachovia's Miami office.

According to the

Guardian

:

"On numerous occasions," say the court papers, "monies were deposited into a CDC by a drug-trafficking organisation.
Using false identities, the CDC then wired that money through its Wachovia correspondent bank accounts for the purchase of airplanes for drug-trafficking organisations."
The court settlement of 2010 would detail that "nearly $13m went through correspondent bank accounts at Wachovia for the purchase of aircraft to be used in the illegal narcotics trade.
From these aircraft, more than 20,000kg of cocaine were seized."
All this occurred despite the fact that Wachovia's office was in Miami, designated by the US government as a "high-intensity money laundering and related financial crime area", and a "high-intensity drug trafficking area".
Since the drug cartel war began in 2005, Mexico had been designated a high-risk source of money laundering.


We Believe Local Journalism is Critical to the Life of a City


Engaging with our readers is essential to

Miami New Times's

mission.
Make a financial contribution or sign up for a newsletter, and help us keep telling Miami's stories with no paywalls.

In other words, the days of the cocaine cowboys might be behind us, but Miami is still playing a central role in the drug trade.
Investigators say Wachovia failed to scrutinize as much as $378 billion in transfers.

But Wachovia struck a nice bargain with its $160 million settlement: The feds agreed to "defer" criminal charges for a year.

The deadline for prosecution came and went last month, meaning Wachovia handled cash for the most ruthless, violent organized crime groups in the world and got off by basically saying,

Our bad!


Maria Cazañes was evicted from her home right before Hurricane Dorian.



####
document number 15: 
The Cassava Connection: Mafia-linked drug smuggling bust in New York echoes infamous 1980s racket


The Cucino a Modo Mio pizza restaurant at 51-01 108th St.
in Queens, New York.
(Google)


When authorities in the United States and Italy on May 7 announced charges against four people in an international drug smuggling operation run by organized crime from a pizzeria in Queens, New York, it brought to mind the infamous "Pizza Connection" case of the 1980s, when twenty-two Sicilian-born Mafia members were nearly all convicted or entered guilty pleas for trafficking heroin out of pizza parlors in the East and Midwest.

But the latest caper might be better dubbed the "Cassava Connection."
Fifty-nine-year-old Gregorio Gigliotti, tied to the Genovese crime family in Queens, teamed with his wife and son to import cocaine hidden in boxes of cassava root – typically used to make tapioca pudding – from Costa Rica, shipped in forty-foot cargo containers and destined for sale in New York and Italy on behalf of the ‘Ndrangheta, (

non-grang-uta

) of Calabria, Italy, considered the world’s most dominant organized crime group.

Compared with the Pizza Connection case, the Gigliottis’ drug trafficking was at a much lower level in terms of monetary value, barely reaching $13 million.
The 1980s "pizza" drug ring involved the movement of 1,650 pounds of heroin worth $1.6 billion shipped from Sicily to New York from 1979 to 1984.
The operation, led by former Sicilian Mafia leader Gaetano Badalamenti and Bonanno family captain Salvatore Catalano, involved heroin distribution and money laundering using pizzerias in New York, New Jersey, Michigan, Wisconsin and Illinois as fronts.
In 1987, after a seventeen-month trial, Badalamenti, Catalano and all but one – Badalamenti’s son Vito — of the other living defendants were convicted of being part of the ring.
One defendant out on bail was killed in 1986 and another was shot in early 1987 but survived.

The prosecution for the Pizza Connection case was famously led by Rudy Giuliani, who later became the mayor of New York, and Louis Freeh, who later became the FBI director.

What could make the Cassava Connection memorable, beyond being controlled by a major Italian syndicate, is the almost comical examples of bravado by Gregorio Gigliotti, in conversations with his wife, Eleonora, and son Angelo that were recorded by the Justice Department from wiretaps on their domestic and international phone calls.
Gregorio claimed to have broken the nose of a man in the drug conspiracy, and last August told his wife that he once ate the kidney and part of the heart of a conspirator who had misplaced about $20,000 in drug money.
In September, in a recorded conversation with Angelo, Gregorio said he wanted to beat to death a man who owed him money in the way two brothers were killed with baseball bats in the movie

Casino

.

Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn, New York, allege that Gregorio Gigliotti, a native of Calabria and a naturalized U.S. citizen, and American-born Angelo, thirty-four, both associated with the Genovese organized crime family, in particular with Anthony "Tough Tony" Federicci, a top Genovese capo regime, or captain, living in Queens, who invested in the Gigliottis’ scheme.
FBI Assistant Agent in Charge Diego Rodriguez described the plot as an attempt "to establish a global cocaine ring."

On March 11, federal law enforcement officers raided the Cucino a Modo Mio pizza restaurant in Queens, New York, and seized this cache of firearms, including a Keltec 9mm handgun and a .38-caliber derringer with no serial number.
(U.S. Justice Department)

The elder Gigliotti, prosecutors contend, based his family’s drug dealing out of Cucino a Modo Mio, a pizza restaurant on 108th Street in the Corona section of Queens that received rave Yelp reviews before its closure by federal authorities.
It was run by Gregorio and his fifty-four-year-old wife, Eleonora, also a naturalized citizen formerly of Calabria.
The main goal of the operation was first to smuggle bundles of cash to Costa Rica where the cocaine was purchased, have the drugs hidden in the cardboard boxes of cassava, and occasionally pineapple, exported by ship to a port in Wilmington, Delaware, and then trucked to the warehouse of the Gigliottis’ Fresh Farms Export Corporation, a produce business in the Bronx serving as a front.
The cocaine was transported by a commercial ship or shipping company to Italy for sale where a fourth conspirator, Gregorio’s 56-year-old cousin Franco Fazio, knew a customs agent in the southern state of Calabria who would look the other way and allow the drugs to be distributed by the ‘Ndrangheta.

Based on shipping manifests from September 16, 2012, through March of this year, the defendants sent to the United States thirty-seven refrigerated cargo containers purportedly with "fresh cassava," a vegetable also called "yucca," through Dole Ocean Cargo Express and the Isabella Shipping Company.
The boxes were shipped from Costa Rica to the Port of Wilmington, Delaware for delivery to Fresh Farms.
U.S. authorities estimate the Gigliotti enterprise brought in about $12.6 million worth of cocaine during those two and a half years.

About a year ago, the FBI and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement started gathering evidence in the case, which they called Operation Columbus.
In late June, they obtained judicial approval to wiretap the Gigiloittis’ phones.
Later, they used physical surveillance and an unnamed confidential informant, a foreign national who had served a term in an American prison for narcotics trafficking and is seeking asylum in the United States, according to federal prosecutors.

The arrests of the Gigliottis and Fazio came after years of investigations in the United States and Italy into drug trafficking by the ‘Ndrangheta in the New York area.
The inquiries revealed that Gregorio and Eleonora Gigilotti may have been running drugs from the city to Italy since at least 2008, accepting payment in Euros in Italy and then exchanging them for dollars at New Jersey casinos.

In a March 11 court filing in New York, U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch stated that going back to 1990, the ‘Ndrangheta had been conducting narcotics smuggling through metropolitan New York with syndicate members in Calabria and Toronto.
The criminal gang currently operates throughout Europe, Canada, the United States, Australia and parts of South America.

"Italian and American law enforcement authorities identify ‘Ndrangheta as the most powerful crime syndicate in the world, controlling billions in assets and annual profits from a variety of sources ranging from their infiltration of legitimate units called

‘ndrines

, whose members are all blood relatives, typically originating in a particular town or other geographic area within Calabria, and whose ancestors were all previously inducted members of the

‘ndrine

."

In 2007, the Italian Justice Ministry and Italian law enforcement began investigating the ‘Ndrangheta’s drug trafficking activities with people in Italy and New York and Mexican drug dealers, Lynch stated.
The probe led to the arrests of hundreds of suspects in America and Italy, including an Italian national in Queens named Giulio Schirippa and an American, Christopher Castellano, both charged with drug trafficking in New York in 2008.

Castellano, in exchange for being freed on bail in New York in March 2009, agreed to "sing" to U.S. prosecutors, saying that he and Schirippa bought cocaine from a source in New York for about $30,000 a kilo and then exported the drugs to Italy where Schirippa would sell them for about $50,000 per kilo.
Castellano said that in about April 2008, he observed a foreign national – who later became a government informant – starting to meet with Gregorio Gigilotti, whom he learned bought $50,000 worth of cocaine.
(Castellano was shot and killed on July 4, 2010, in Queens and the homicide case is yet to be solved.)

In 2008, the informant admitted to authorities he was supplying Castellano and Schirippa with cocaine while working at a legal business owned by the Genovese-connected Federicci and that Federicci was in some sort of business activity with Gigliotti.
The informant said he sold three kilos of cocaine to Gigliotti, who then told him he was shipping the drugs to Italy with a commercial carrier or shipping company.

"According to (the informant), Eleonora Gigliotti would travel to Italy, where (Gregorio) Gigliotti controlled a commercial carrier employee who would allow packages with drugs to pass through Italian Customs," Lynch stated.
"Eleonora Gigliotti would then retrieve the package with the drugs for further distribution to others in Italy.
She would then return to the United States with payment for the drugs in Euros, which Eleonora and Gregorio Gigliotti would convert into U.S. dollars at different casinos in Atlantic City, New Jersey."

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement last year recovered these flattened packages of cocaine hidden within boxes labeled "fresh cassava" inside refrigerated cargo containers taken by ship from Costa Rica and intended for a produce warehouse in Bronx, New York, that served as a front for trafficking the drug by oversees ship to Italy for the ‘Ndrangheta organized crime group.
(U.S. Justice Department)

Then in early 2014, Italian law enforcement told U.S. authorities that Gregorio Gigliotti was negotiating with an Italian national to sell ten kilograms of cocaine for $40,000 per kilogram to members of the ‘Ndrangheta, that Gregorio had traveled to Italy that year and he and Eleonora, through their produce company Fresh Farms, had imported cargo containers of produce.

U.S. officials then sought and received authority to intercept phone calls made by the Gigliottis.
The calls came from the pizza restaurant’s phone and cell phones used by Gregorio and Angelo.
From wiretaps, surveillance of suspects by FBI agents in San Jose, Costa Rica, and other techniques, they developed a criminal case on the international narcotics trafficking plot starting from July 1, 2014, to March 11.

The Gigliottis imported fifty-five kilograms of cocaine with a street value of $2 million during that time, federal prosecutors allege.
Eleonora, who boasted of her unique ability to hide many bundles of cash inside her baggage, traveled to Costa Rica in August with $400,000 concealed in two pieces of luggage to deliver to their sources of cocaine.
In September, under Gregorio’s instructions, Angelo gave $170,000 to his mother, who put the cash in suitcases and flew to Costa Rica to meet Fazio, who had flown there from Italy to use the cash to buy more cocaine to be smuggled to New York.

Federal agents kept their eyes on the Gigliottis and Fazio in Costa Rica while Italian authorities kept tabs on Fazio in Calabria.
The Justice Department used a translator to transcribe phone conversations in the Italian slang of Calabrese between Gregorio and Eleonora, who both at times expressed their desire to commit violence on others.
The informant supplied American authorities with details about the plot.

The Gigliottis’ plan started to unravel in October, when U.S. Customs agents intercepted their shipment of cassava from Costa Rica that was meant for Farm Fresh in New York.
From a search of the cardboard boxes of cassava root, agents found about 40 kilograms of cocaine – bought by Fazio — wrapped in dark-colored, flattened packages.

Gregorio found out and then had a second shipment from the South American country sent to a different port, this time in Philadelphia.
But U.S. agents were on to it, and on December 29 they recovered another fifteen kilograms of cocaine from the boxes of cassava.

On March 11, the FBI and other law agencies arrested the three Gigliottis in New York on suspicion of conspiracy to import more than fifty-five kilograms of cocaine.
In Calabria, Italy, the SCO, a special operations unit of Italian state police, arrested Fazio.
In April, a U.S. grand jury in New York, in a superseding indictment, charged Gregorio, Eleonora and Angelo with conspiracy to import cocaine, two counts of importing cocaine, conspiracy to import cocaine with the intent of selling it, attempted possession of cocaine and unlawful use of firearms.
The grand jury charged Fazio with four counts related to drug trafficking

A search by law enforcement that day of the Cucino a Modo Mio pizzeria in Queens yielded a 12-gauge shotgun, a loaded .357 magnum revolver and five other firearms, brass knuckles, more than 100 rounds of ammunition and $100,000 in cash.
In the homes shared by Gregorio and Eleonora in Whitestone and East hills, New York, authorities found a loaded .45-caliber handgun and $18,000 in cash.
The grand jury ordered the Gigliottis to forfeit to the government $12.6 million in drug proceeds, the cash, bullets and weapons that were seized, their 2010 Mercedes-Benz SUV and the pizza restaurant itself on 108

th

Street.

The federal raid also seized brass knuckles, $100,000 in U.S. currency and some Euro bills.
(U.S. Justice Department)

Eleonora’s lawyers filed a series of documents in support of her release — she agreed to wear a GPS ankle and turn over her passport — on $4 million bail backed by property put up by her other family members.
But prosecutors opposed releasing any of the defendants, saying they were dangerous to community safety.
They also might take flight to avoid prosecution since Gregorio and Eleonora bought a home in Italy, recently transferred $350,000, and know they could face a minimum mandatory sentence of fifteen years in prison.
Angelo, because of his two previous felony convictions, could be sentenced to life in prison.
All three have pleaded not guilty.
It is not known if Fazio has entered a plea.

Prosecutors, to bolster arguments against allowing the defendants to post bail, cited conversations by the Gigliottis in which threats were made to hurt others to protect their interests in the drug trade.

In one instance on September 19, Gregorio, while telling Angelo he wanted to beat a fellow drug trafficker to death, had this exchange about a scene in the movie

Casino

, when two brothers are driven to a cornfield and one is made to watch his brother beaten to death with a baseball bat before the other is beaten and both are buried:

Gregorio: Do you remember the move

Casino

?

Angelo:

Casino

?

Gregorio: Yes.
Did you remember what happened to the two brothers?

Angelo: Yes.

Gregorio: This is what I have to do to him.
Both.

Angelo: No problem.

Gregorio: I have a plan ready, a plan to set him up.

U.S. District Judge Sandra Townes in Brooklyn cited statements made by Eleonora on the phone with Gregorio about encouraging her husband to commit acts of violence against Fazio in a town in Italy to punish him for failing to pay drug-related debts.

Gregorio: . .
.
I’ll throw him on the ground and I’ll beat him up so badly, I’ll leave him in the middle of the square.
And his brother come, ‘cause if his brother does dare to come, I’ll just shoot his brother.
Hum!
He better be careful.

Eleonora: In my opinion they did use it together.

Eleonora: . .
.
Angelo wants to come.
Heh-heh.

Gregorio: Come for what, we will look like sh–.

Eleonora: Well, you too.
Hurting him in front of his kids, Grego, we’re going to look bad.

Gregorio: Who the f— cares if I hurt him in front of them.
What the f— do I care.
Who cares.

Eleonora: . .
.
Then bring him here and bang him up over here.
You have someone grab him here at night.
He’ll learn.
You gonna have it done there?

Gregorio: We’ll see.

Eleonora: You’re alone there.

In another recorded phone conversation cited by the judge in denying her bail, Eleonora said to Gregorio about Fazio, "tell him … there’s jail … will break his head.
Tell him … six months in the hospital, you should say…let him get a beating."

The criminal case is in the discovery phase and no trial date has been set in the federal court in Brooklyn.

Jeff Burbank, a longtime journalist, is the content development specialist for The Mob Museum.
Contact him at jburbank@themobmuseum.org.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = evacuation
document number 1: 
How was the Chernobyl and Pripyat evacuation ?


Those who knew the distribution of radioactive substances, hastened to leave the infected area on their own in the morning, but it was not very successful.

chernobyl evacuation footage


• There were no mobile phones at that time.
Telephones were not installed at all, but they also had a problem, the telephone connection did not work.
And not only in the zone of defeat, there was no connection with Kiev.
Most of the population, especially the male, was involved in the liquidation of the consequences and was at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
Call home and say that you need to leave could not.
• Low information content of the population.
Neither one really knew the extent to which pollution occurred.
Of course, this was the era of atomic research, but they did not keep their own dosimeters.
• Everyone until the last hoped for a positive outcome of events.

Evacuation of Chernobyl-2 (Duga radar)


How to evacuate a closed object tells Andrei Shabanov.
At the time of accident, he was 10 years old.


That morning he went to school, all classes were held, and only at the last lesson the teacher announced that an accident had occurred in the city of Pripyat.
What happened, or who did not explain, even the parents.
All the students were told to return home and not leave their apartments.
All the military city could not voluntarily leave.
The entire garrison participated in the elimination of the accident, after which it was transferred to a new place of military service.

Evacuation of Pripyat


In order to produce the evacuation of 47 thousand people, two thousand buses are needed.
The district administration took time to gather the necessary amount of transport, make it refuel, instruct drivers, coordinate their actions with the military and finally reach the city.

Chernobyl evacuation announcement:


Buses were taken from bus stations in Kiev.
The country plunged into a transport collapse, or whoever does not say anything, tickets at railway stations do not sell, people are advised not to leave their homes.
At night, the administration of Pripyat conducted a limited briefing of administrative personnel, conversation was conducted with staff of hospitals, schools, kindergartens.


Pripyat chernobyl evacuation video:


Chernobyl Pripyat evacuation timeline:



At 12:20 the briefing was held in the city police department.
City was divided into six sectors.
Each was assigned to responsible, for each entrance of residential house was allocated two police officers.


At 12:30 the police arrived at their places and began to instruct the residents.


At 13:10 an official announcement was given by radio (chernobyl evacuation message): "Attention, Dear comrades!
The City Council of People’s Deputies reports that in connection with accident at Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the city of Pripyat, an unfavorable radiation situation develops.
Party and Soviet bodies and military units take necessary measures.
However, in order to ensure the complete safety of people, and, in first place, children, it becomes necessary to temporarily evacuate the residents of city to nearby settlements in Kyiv region.
To this end, to each apartment building today, on April 27, starting from fourteen hours after zero, a bus will be served accompanied by police officers and representatives of the city executive committee.
It is recommended to take documents with you, extremely necessary things, as well as, for the first time, food.
Heads of enterprises and institutions defined the circle of employees who remain in place to ensure the normal functioning of the city’s enterprises.
All houses for the period of evacuation will be guarded by police.
Comrades, temporarily leaving your home, do not forget, please, close the windows, turn off the electrical and gas appliances, turn off the water taps.
Please observe peace, orderliness and order during temporary evacuation. "


At 14:00 the residents began to take buses, by 16:30 the city was evacuated.


At 18:00 the police conducted a second round of apartments to make sure there were no residents.



Together with police officers among the latter, city was left by administration staff and members of the expert commission.
On the borders of city there was a cordon.


Evacuation Chernobyl


Chernobyl was evacuated later, as it was not much further from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
The evacuation of inhabitants took place according to the already worked out scheme.
Police officers walked around the apartments and houses, explained to all residents.
Assigned the time of collection, placed residents on buses.


In what place were people evacuated?


All residents were placed in nearby villages, the heads of rural settlements were informed in advance.
Two or four buses were brought to village, and head of the settlement distributed the evacuees to their homes.
As people say, survivors of the evacuation, there was no quarrel, everyone treated with sympathy and understanding, shared food and things.


Some then left for relatives, those who had no one to go had to wait for new houses.
New houses were built at an accelerated pace in the Kiev region.



####
document number 2: 
Hurricane Evacuation Order






####
document number 3: 
Hurricane Evacuation routes






####
document number 4: 
Hurricane Michael, National Hurricane Center, Florida discussed on Morning Edition


Automatic TRANSCRIPT


0:00 - 0:00

Hurricane

Michael

is forecast to be one of the most destructive storms to hit the

Florida

, panhandle.
In decades, it could send life-threatening surges of ocean water to coastal areas throughout the state

NPR

's.

Emily Sullivan

reports state and local governments are preparing for torrential downpours.
Hurricane Michael will likely make landfall along the

Gulf Coast

today as a category three storm.
According to the

National Hurricane Center

.
The agency said the storm steady intensification over the past two days despite shifting westerly winds defies traditional logic, the torrential rains and winds of upwards of one hundred and twenty miles per hour.
Hurricane Michael is a massive storm that could bring total devastation to parts of our state, especially in the panhandle.
That's Florida governor

Rick Scott Scott

says he spoke to

President Trump

on Monday afternoon.
He's committed to providing any federal resources Florida may need FEMA is already on Florida and ground providing assistance in the form of the

EPA

homeland security.
And health and human services, the National Hurricane Center has hurricane tropical storm and storm surge warnings for more than three hundred miles of coast.
They say these regions can expect to eight to twelve feet of storm surge.
That means a water will come miles inshore and could easily rise over the roofs of houses.
The governor has declared a state of emergency in thirty five counties and stressing the need to follow any evacuation orders.
This storm surge is absolutely do not think you can survive and local authorities are stressing timely evacuation to

David Peterson

is the deputy director of emergency management and Levy county, which faces the Gulf of

Mexico

.
He spoke to W F T bomb surge is the number one problem that you could see from these storms.
You have rain have win.
But storm surge that's a lot of water that can come on shore right now, he's working to get county residents protective measures before the hurricane makes landfall today.
Meteorologists predict that by Wednesday night or Thursday morning.
Michael.
Nls rains are likely to spread into the Carolinas and mid

Atlantic

perhaps bringing more water to areas still recovering from hurricane Florence.
Emily sullivan.
NPR news..



####
document number 5: 
Lessons From Hurricane Irma: When To Evacuate And When To Shelter In Place


Traffic backed up on Interstate 75 in Jennings, Fla., near the Florida/Georgia state line as people fled Hurricane Irma on Sept.
8, 2017.


With the beginning of the Atlantic hurricane season, residents in coastal areas throughout the Southeast are once again being urged to have a plan ready in case they have to evacuate.

After last year, it's a message that carries some weight.
In the days before Hurricane Irma struck Florida last September, nearly 7 million residents left their homes to seek shelter and safety elsewhere.
Since then, emergency managers and researchers have been studying the lessons of the largest hurricane evacuation in U.S. history.

Hurricane Irma hit the Florida Keys as a Category 4 storm and then took a track up the entire Florida Peninsula.
The storm's shifting track — first projected up the East Coast, then later forecast to pummel Florida's Gulf Coast — left most of the state's 21 million people in its path.

Heavy traffic clogged major Florida highways as millions evacuated.
Mandatory evacuations were ordered first in the Florida Keys.
As the storm approached, emergency managers in nearly every coastal county followed.

Richard Olson, director of the International Hurricane Research Center at Florida International University, says that as mass evacuations go, it was successful.

"Pretty much everybody who wanted to get out, got out," he says.
"Although I've heard anywhere from 20 to 30 hours not being uncommon at all."

Lines were long, but gas remained available for those heading north.
It wasn't the nightmare scenario Texans experienced in 2005 as millions fled the advance of Hurricane Rita.
Thousands in Texas were stranded in a 100-mile traffic jam after they ran out of gas.
Twenty-four people died in a bus fire.

In that case, as with Irma, the damage ultimately done by the hurricane didn't justify the massive evacuation beforehand.
Bill Johnson, the director of emergency management in Palm Beach County, says nearly half of those who fled their homes for Hurricane Irma were from areas where evacuations had not been ordered.

"We have an over-evacuation problem," he says.

Emergency managers mostly order hurricane evacuations for water, not wind.
In Florida, the biggest concern is storm surge.
Disaster experts say rapidly rising water poses a much greater threat to property and lives than high winds.
But with Hurricane Irma, researcher Jason Senkbeil says many evacuees held a different view.

"The Irma evacuees," he says, "were terrified of wind."

Days before it approached Florida, while it was still in the Caribbean, news reports focused on Irma's intensity and high wind speeds.
Senkbeil, a meteorologist at the University of Alabama, studies how emergency managers communicate risk in hurricanes.
During the Irma evacuation, he interviewed people at rest stops on Florida's interstates.
Many said that when they made the decision to evacuate, Irma was still a Category 4 or 5 hurricane.

"There was an idea there that at least 145-mile-per-hour winds were going to come across Florida," Senkbeil says.
"And that's clearly not what happened."

By the time it hit the Florida mainland, Irma was downgraded to a Category 3 storm and quickly lost intensity, bringing tropical storm force winds to much of the state.
Clearly, it could have been worse.

But Bill Johnson worries that unclear messaging led people in safe areas to evacuate their homes.
Evacuations carry their own danger of traffic accidents and health problems related to increased stress.
Also, they're costly.
On average, Johnson says, evacuating costs $1,000 for a typical family.
And unnecessary evacuations tie up scarce resources.

"You saw the lines at the [gas stations]," he says.
"You saw hotel rooms, many hotel rooms.
People had to just keep going farther up the road because hotel rooms were taken."

The National Hurricane Center is introducing new ways to show when and where strong winds will arrive for specific areas within a forecast cone.
Johnson says those tools will help emergency managers encourage those who need to evacuate to do so early and to tell those who don't need to evacuate that their best course is to stay put and shelter in place.



####
document number 6: 
Ambae evacuation effort in full swing


HELP the people of Ambae Island currently experiencing a major disaster.
A ‘Dunkirk-style’ operation is underway as thousands flee the island’s volcano, which continues to erupt.
Funding is needed NOW in this desperate situation.


Can I ask for your support please As you will be aware the current volcanic activity on Ambae island in Vanuatu has resulted in all of the islanders being evacuated.
Apparently many are being taken to open grounds on Penticost island.
Vanuatu does not have the resources to provide adequate support for these people.

Our Vanuatu Rotarians are working to provide support where they can however they desperately need funding to enable them to purchase essential supplies

An armada of ferries, trawlers and other boats is heading towards the Vanuatu island of Ambae, as the country prepares to evacuate the first five percent of its population.


The government early last week decided to evacuate the whole population of Ambae, as the island's volcano continues to erupt.

More than 7000 people are already crammed into coastal evacuation centres, as a thick layer of volcanic ash and acid rain blankets villages and crops.

The disaster coordinator on Ambae Manuel Ure said authorities were hoping to clear the whole island - more than 11,000 people - this weekend.

The evacuees will be scattered around the nearby islands of Santo, Pentecost, Malekula and Maewo, he said.

"A few people have already made personal arrangements to travel out from Ambae to their families in either Port Vila or Santo or the other islands, but the provincial arrangement, we are waiting [for] ships to come in and are hoping that we can evacuate most people probably during the weekend."

But Mr Ure said money and resources were really tight and he called on other provinces to assist more.

People being evacuated on Ambae.
Photo: YumiToktok


"We continue to supply them with basic food but at the moment we still have problem with food, shelter and water.

"The Vanuatu government been promising to give us some money and support us with funds and at the moment we received just 1 million vatu ($NZ12,800), but managing 8000 people that amount of money is not enough and we are still running out of shelter, food and water."

A leader in the Malbangbang area of southern Pentecost, Robinson Tema, said chiefs had made the decision to accept about 500 evacuees.

He said villagers were clearing out Nakamals and churches, readying for their arrival some time before Sunday.

"The area that I'm living in, they have lots of rivers.
Maybe with food, we need help from the government to support us with food to feed the people who will be coming from Ambae."

Mr Tema said he did not know how long people would be staying.

People devastated at having to leave their homes


The head of the provincial government on Ambae Georgewin Garae said people were upset at having to leave their home.

Mr Garae said islanders were used to the volcano - one of the world's most active - but he has never seen it erupt like it is currently.

He said people were devastated at what's going on, but safety was paramount.

"It is very devastating, it is very sad, the information that was going out yesterday notifying people of the move, people were crying.
But then the understanding is that safety comes first."

Mr Garae said it is impossible to say how long it may be before they can return.

He said ships were starting to arrive from around the country with much needed supplies.

"We are hopeful that the ship that is coming today will provide enough for the remaining two or three days before we evacuate them to the other locations."

Mr Garae said he expected the island to be completely evacuated by the middle of next week.

People from all walks of life are contributing to the Ambae relief effort.
Photo: Vanuatu Daily Post


A member of the Ambae community the capital, Port VIla, said it was doing everything it could to help evacuees from their home island.

Henry Vira said the community was spending Friday evening fundraising at the main market on Port Vila's waterfront.

He said it had spend the week rallying donations from local businesses, and had already managed to send supplies to help those on Ambae in evacuation centres.

"Two shipments have already gone to Ambae with over 1,000 cartons of water and some food and the third one is actually leaving today with more supplies of water and food and other essential items," he said.

Mr Vira said it was incredibly difficult being so far away, and his 76-year-old mother was among those being evacuated.

He said it looked like the people of Ambae would need support - both at their refuges, and when they eventually return to their ash covered villages - for a long time.

Lavinia Mahit of Auckland also had family on Ambae.

She said the situation was heartbreaking.

"I'm very concerned, I mean, what do you pack?
What do you get?
Where do you go?"

"And when you're being evacuated, how do you settle into another village on another island?"



####
document number 7: 
Evacuate!!
Evacuate!!
Evacuate Now!



December 5-8, 2017


Santa Clarita, California

Whoop-whoop!
Whoop-whoop!
This is a mandatory evacuation.
Leave the area immediately!

Red Santa Clarita fire engines, green Cal Fire crew trucks, black and white L.A. County Sheriff cars enter the RV park like an invading army.
Blue, yellow and red lights flashing, bullhorns blaring, they all push an immediate level of anxiety and fear in front of them.
Skies that were clear and blue moments ago turn gray, blocking out most of the sunlight.
Ash and embers blow down the interior roads, joining the leaves and sticks that have been pelting us for an hour.
The whole world smells like a small house with a blocked fireplace.
Soot leaks through every tiny opening.
Hell has found us and we have to move - now!!

Ninety minutes earlier.......

Cousin Cindy checks in to see how we are.

Fine, why?

She tells us there's a fire in Ventura County, but we don't see or smell smoke to the west.
When Bill steps outside to leave for his doctor's appointment he shows me there is smoke to the east.
It looks to be in the hills on the other side of Interstate 5, and it just started.
Although the wind is picking up we're both confident it's not an issue, and he heads out.
A short while later he calls to say his appointment is cancelled due to a power outage at the medical center, and he's coming home.
He notes that he was directed around road closures on the other side of the interstate.
I call Brian (his office is nearby) to tell him about the closures, but he's already at work.
He lets me know that their apartment has no power as well (it's close to the medical center).
The outage is due to high winds, unrelated to any fire.

60 minutes earlier........

Bill calls to say he can't get back to the park.
The interstate is now closed in both directions, as well as two side roads that come here from town.
I'm on my own.
As the winds reach 40 mph, pushing the fire in my direction, I call Brian to see if he can get to me before the final road closes between us.
Just in case....
He can and does.
I pack up the interior, turn on the local news, and fix us some lunch.
Bill checks in periodically to confirm he still can't get to us.
I let him know there's a little smoke to the south, but otherwise our sky is clear, there's no smell of smoke.

30 minutes earlier.....

Most of the news is about the two fires to our west, and the one south in Sylmar.
The Rye Fire (ours already has a name) is mentioned, but it's "the little one" of those that are rapidly devastating much of Southern California.
I put the small chairs in the storage bin, and realize I don't know where the key is to remove the ladder we strap to our steps.
This means I can't retract the steps if I want to get the rig out - just in case.
After looking in a couple places and talking with Bill about options (he has the key with him), I check and the cable isn't locked.
The ladder goes on the picnic table with the big chair - just in case.

And then......

In hindsight, Brian and I had plenty of time to disconnect everything without stressing out, but at the time we're both feeling the pressure of the chaos and urgency that has descended on us.
Brian confirmed with the sheriff that we can take the rig if we hurry.
Slides in, utilities unhooked (I've never done this before!
), and the brace under the step

finally

pulled out, I almost forget to retract the jacks (thank goodness for those annoying alarms!).
As I pull out with Brian following behind, I'm amazed at the number of people in their cars, leaving their homes on wheels behind.
I remember later that many are permanent residents with no time to take down all they have set up.
I try not to think about those who took off earlier and left their pets behind.
We pass several television vans and reporters set up with their big cameras, filming us evacuating.
OMG - we're EVACUATING!


Escaping hell.



I first head west before realizing there's really no where to go this way - and the high wind is as scary as the fire - so we turn around.
Passing by the RV park it is surreal to see a row of firefighters making a stand as flames rush down the hills to where our home was just minutes before.
A huge wall of smoke bends to the high winds.
It looks completely unstoppable.
If it changes direction by just a little, the whole park will be gone in a flash.



Fortunately that never happens.
When I let Bill know we are getting out he contacts our friend Scott who has the lot where we've stayed in the past.
He lets me know they'll meet me there.
Brian heads back to his own place where the power comes back on just as he gets home.
I am so grateful for his coming to help me today!!


The traffic clears up as I near the lot, and I'm grateful to have the fire far behind me.



We settle in for the evening - even if the evacuation lifts we're fine here for now.
We were checking out on Wednesday anyway so we only need to go back for hoses and the few items I left behind.
I keep track of the fire online, noting that by 8 PM the RV park is the only evacuation still in effect.
It will end up not lifting until the following afternoon.
With the winds still high, and hot spots nearby, the danger remains.


This is the perimeter fence for the RV park - the firefighter stands at the back of one of the spaces.




At the base of the hill, 200 yards from where our home was.




Just to the east of the RV park, we are so grateful to these brave firefighters.





Six Flags Magic Mountain was also evacuated.
The RV park is to the right of this photo.
These four photos from the

Santa Clarita Signal

.



Although our plans are to be in Mojave for a week, we don't get out of Santa Clarita until Friday morning.
The winds continue at 35+ mph with gusts even higher along our route.
We pick up our items at the RV park, talking with our neighbor about their night sleeping in their pickup in the Walmart parking lot while worrying about the fate of their trailer.
Some are washing off their rigs, others sweeping aways piles of leaves, it is a very subdued scene.
Small smoking hot spots on the nearby hill, and the smell of charcoal are vivid reminders of how lucky everyone is that the wind didn't change direction - it was already way too close.
We attend a "class" for Bill's upcoming cataract surgery.
Gives us zero information not already included in the written instructions, and a huge waste of time.
He'll be getting improved vision for Christmas this year - both eyes, a week apart.
As we pull out on Friday morning we are grateful that this particular adventure is behind us.
It was not on any bucket list, and we hope to never repeat the experience.
When we set up in Mojave, Bill makes sure I know how all the hookups work, and we add the spare keys to current rings.
Just in case.

Five days later the Thomas Fire in Ventura rages north, now threatening Santa Barbara.
New fires have burned thousands of acres in Riverside and San Diego counties.
The winds have finally died down and firefighters are optimistic that the worst is behind us.
So many have lost everything, over 7000 remain under mandatory evacuation.
We know how fortunate we are that our story has a happy ending, in no small part thanks to that invading army.



####
document number 8: 
Factbox: Countries evacuating nationals from coronavirus-hit areas


(Reuters) - A growing number of countries around the world have been evacuating or planning to evacuate diplomatic staff and citizens from areas hit by the new coronavirus.

Following are some countries’ evacuation plans, and how they aim to manage the health risk from those who are returning.

- Hong Kong arranged four flights to bring back 533 of its residents from the Chinese province of Hubei.
The flights are set to return by March 5 and those coming back face a 14-day quarantine upon arrival.

- Over 200 Hong Kong residents on the Diamond Princess cruise in Japan had been flown back by Feb.
23 and are spending two weeks in quarantine.
Authorities said 70 of the 364 Hong Kong residents on the ship were infected and will remain in Japan along with other citizens who were in close contact with them.

- Dependants and some staff were evacuated from the British embassy in Tehran as of March 1 but essential staff will remain.

- Some 30 British passengers arrived back home on Feb.
22 from the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan.
There were more than 70 British passengers on the cruise liner when cases of Covid-19 started to emerge.

- Britain’s final evacuation flight from Wuhan, carrying more than 200 people, landed in Britain on Feb.
9.
A plane carrying 83 British and 27 European Union nationals from Wuhan landed at the end of January.

- Taiwan flew back 19 passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise ship on Feb.
21.
It evacuated 247 of the estimated 500 Taiwanese stranded in Wuhan on Feb.
3.
(bit.ly/2HOfYtg)

- A flight carrying 129 Canadians evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship landed on Feb.
21.
All repatriated passengers on the chartered flight had tested negative.
There were 256 Canadians on board the ship, of which 47 have tested positive.

- Canada, after evacuating 215 people earlier, flew back 185 citizens from Wuhan on Feb.
11.
All evacuees were quarantined for two weeks.

- More than 150 Australians arrived home on Feb.
20 to begin two weeks of quarantine after finally leaving the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked in Japan.

- A plane load of New Zealanders, Australians and Pacific Islanders evacuated from Wuhan arrived in Auckland, New Zealand on Feb.
5, officials said.

- Kuwait to send a plane to Italy to evacuate citizens.

- Qatar to bring back Qatari and Kuwaiti citizens from Iran.

- Indonesia has sent a navy ship to bring back 188 of its nationals working as crew aboard the World Dream cruise liner amid coronavirus concerns, a minister and a health ministry official said on Feb 24.

- Indonesia’s government flew 243 Indonesians from Hubei on Feb.
2 and placed them under quarantine at a military base on an island northwest of Borneo.

- In central Ukraine residents protested the arrival of a plane carrying evacuees from Hubei on Feb.
20, despite official assurances there was no danger of infection.
In addition to 45 Ukrainians, there were 27 citizens of Argentina on the plane, as well as citizens from the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Kazakhstan, Costa Rica and other countries.

- The United States flew back on Feb.
17 over 300 Americans who had been stuck on a cruise ship affected by the coronavirus.
They faced two more weeks of quarantine after spending the previous 14 days docked in Japan.

- The United States authorized the voluntary departure of its government employees and their family members from Hong Kong on Feb.
11.
On Feb.
6, two planes with about 300 passengers, mostly U.S. citizens, took off from Wuhan for the United States.

- Nepal on Feb.
16 evacuated 175 of its nationals from Wuhan.

- Six South Koreans and one Japanese spouse from the cruise shit flew to South Korea on Feb.
19 on a chartered flight.

- South Korea evacuated 147 people on a third chartered flight from Wuhan that arrived on Feb.
12.
The country flew 368 people on a charter flight that arrived on Jan.
31.

- A second evacuation flight brought back another 174 Singaporeans and their family members from Wuhan to the city state on Feb.
9.

- Thirty Filipinos returned to the Philippines on Feb.
9 from Wuhan, the Department of Foreign Affairs said.

- The 34 Brazilians evacuated from Wuhan landed in Brazil on Feb.
9.

- Uzbekistan evacuated 251 people from China, the state airline said on Feb.
6.

- Italy flew back 56 nationals from Wuhan to Rome on Feb.
3.

- Saudi Arabia evacuated 10 students from Wuhan, Saudi state television reported on Feb.
2.

- Bangladesh evacuated 312 people, mostly students, from the coronavirus epicenter of Wuhan on a special flight on Feb.
1, the foreign minister told media after they were brought back.



####
document number 9: 
22 photos inside 'Dustoff' — the Army's life-saving medevac crews



Army soldiers count on the elite medics assigned to air ambulance crews to pull them out of combat when they are wounded.
These crews, called, "Dustoff," fly unarmed choppers into combat and provide medical care to patients en route to US field hospitals.
This air medical evacuation saves lives and bolsters the confidence of soldiers in the field.


Photo: US Army Sgt.
Travis Zielinski

When the terrain is too rough for even a helicopter to land, hoists are used to lower medics or raise patients.


Photo: US Air Force Staff Sgt.
Rasheen A.
Douglas

US Army Dustoff crews typically consist of a pilot, copilot, flight medic, and crew chief.
Some teams, especially those on the newer UH-72A aircraft, will have a firefighter/paramedic in place of the crew chief unless a hoist operation is expected.


Flight medics will train other soldiers on how to properly transfer patients to a medevac helicopter.


Photo: US Army Staff Sgt.
Ashley Moreno

When possible, the crew chief or flight medic will leave the bird to approach the patient, taking over care and supervising the move to the chopper.


Photo: US Air Force Staff Sgt.
Ashley Reed

This training is sometimes done with foreign militaries to ensure that, should the need arise in combat, the US and other militaries will be able to move patients together.
Here, Republic of Korea soldiers train with US medics.


Medics going down on a hoist are supported by the crew chief, an aviation soldier who maintains the aircraft and specializes in the equipment on the bird.


Photo: US Army National Guard Sgt.
Harley Jelis

Of course, not all injuries happen during calm weather in sunny climes.
Medevac soldiers train to perform their job in harsh weather.


Photo: U.S. Army

The crews also train to rescue wounded soldiers at any hour, day or night.


Some medevac pilots even train to land on ships for when that is the closest or best equipped hospital to treat a patient.


Dustoff crews also care for service members who aren't human.
The most common of these patients are the military working dogs.


The Dustoff helicopters are launched when a "nine line" is called.
When this specially formatted radio call goes out, medevac crews sprint to ready the choppers and take off.


The medevac is eagerly awaited by the troops on the ground who request it.


Photo: US Navy HMC Josh Ives

The flight medics can provide a lot of care even as they move a casualty in the air.
Most patients will get a saline lock or an intravenous drip to replace fluids.


Flight medics have to deal with turbulence, loud noises, and possible attacks from the ground while they treat their patients.


Another challenge flight medics often face is providing treatment in low light or no light conditions.


No light conditions require the use of NVGs, or night vision goggles.


Photo: US Army Sgt.
Duncan Brennan

Medical evacuation helicopters also face challenges while picking up their patients.
The tactical situation can be dangerous where these birds operate.


Ground soldiers have to secure the landing zone.


Photo: US Marine Corps Lance Cpl.
Justin M.
Mason

When the medevac bird returns to the base, the casualty is rushed into the hospital so they can be treated.


Photo: U.S. Army Sgt.
Michael J. MacLeod

If a soldier's injuries are severe enough, they'll be stabilized and prepped again for transport to hospitals outside of the deployment zone.


The mission of those under the Dustoff call sign can be challenging, but it provides great comfort to the troops on the ground.



####
document number 10: 
95,000 stranded at sea: What happens when a cruise ship becomes a hot zone


The last place anyone wants to be during the coronavirus pandemic is stranded aboard a cruise ship, where disease can spread with lightning speed.

This week, the last 3,500 or so passengers aboard three cruise ships stuck at sea will be coming into port at last.
The

Pacific Princess

and the

MSC Magnifica,

are scheduled to berth today in California and France with 1,880 passengers, who will be transferred into home isolation.
The

Costa Deliziosa

had to evacuate one passenger with health issues last week at the port in Marsala, Italy.
The ship’s nearly 2,000 passengers were reportedly quarantined until a coronavirus test came back negative, and the ship is said to be disembarking most of them in Barcelona today before returning to Genoa, Italy with its remaining 453 Italian citizens.
There are still 124 additional ships in U.S. waters with 95,000 crew members of varying nationalities on board with no clear timeline for when and how they will all return to their home countries, some of which have closed their borders.

(

Related: How hard will the coronavirus hit the travel industry?

)

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.



Left:

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.

Right:

Members of the U.S. Coast Guard load personal protective equipment into a

… Read More

Photograph by Gabrielle Lurie, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Petty Officer 3rd Class Taylor Bacon, U.S. Coast Guard District 11, AP (Right)

Since the March 14 no-sail order issued by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the agency has helped bring more than 12,000 citizens and foreign nationals into home isolation.
At least 17 cruises have had passengers testing positive for COVID-19.
"We’ve even had people coming back positive from Nile River cruises," says Cindy Friedman, a medical epidemiologist who leads the CDC’s cruise ship team.

Even when quarantined inside their cabin, passengers are not necessarily shielded from infection, says Joacim Rocklöv , an epidemiologist at Umeå University in Sweden.
Rocklöv estimates that a single person on board the

Diamond Princess

cruise ship in January infected 15 others, a rate four times higher than observed in Wuhan, China, where the new coronavirus virus first emerged.
Rocklöv suggests this could’ve been partly due to a "super spreader" event, such as a social engagement on-board where the first infected passenger or passengers mingled with uninfected ones.

Passengers began to disembark from the Grand Princess cruise ship at the Port of Oakland in Oakland, California on March 10.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


(

Related: Here’s how to fight germs wherever you go.

)

The virus is primarily transmitted through small respiratory droplets, which can spread on surfaces, through close contact, and, possibly, the ship’s ventilation system.
Crew members packed up to eight to a room and delivering food to passengers can also expedite its spread.
The disease has been particularly insidious because as many as a quarter of people who get it may not show symptoms, and infected individuals can spread the virus to others before they show symptoms.
Because cruise ship passengers tend to be older than the overall U.S. population, they are also most susceptible to becoming critically ill or dying.

Michael Callahan , a medical doctor and infectious disease expert at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, participated in medical evacuations of the

Diamond Princess

and

Grand Princess

cruise ships.
He says that if it were up to him, cruises around the world should have been immediately evacuated and passengers and crews quarantined inside hotels for 14 days.
"You’ve got to break the chain of infection," he says.

Diamond Princess

evacuation


The true scale of the threat of COVID-19 first became clear with the outbreak aboard the

Diamond Princess

.
The infection is thought to have been brought on board by an 80-year old Chinese man who had disembarked by the time his positive test came back on February 1.
Even after guests were sequestered in their cabins and the ship docked in Yokohama, Japan, the disease continued to spread among the 2,666 passengers and 1,045 crew.
The first 10 cases were confirmed on February 5.
Japanese authorities removed sick passengers one by one and treated them at a local hospital, but passengers were otherwise confined on board.



Left:

Members of the Filipino Community Center protest perceived lack of health protections for Filipino Grand Princess workers as the ship stopped in San Francisco to restock supplies before sailing back to sea.

… Read More

Photograph by Liz Hafalia, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Tim Rue, Bloomberg, Getty Images (Right)

Deluged with emails and phone calls from passengers and family members, the CDC waited a week to authorize a quarantine operation, at which point more than 200 passengers had tested positive along with 20 crew members, including many in food service.
Inconsistent testing and delays in receiving the results, however, meant that many more were likely infected.

The U.S. had never conducted a large-scale mission to evacuate citizens from abroad amid an infectious disease outbreak.
Doing it on a cruise ship?
That was new, too.
"There was no rulebook," says Callahan.

A little-known agency inside the Department of Health and Human Services known as the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response kicked into action.
Officials there cobbled together teams of doctors, nurse practitioners, nurses and pharmacists, and brought in Callahan and another infectious disease expert, both veterans of Ebola hot zones in African nations.

(

Related: Learn how the coronavirus compares to Ebola, flu, and other outbreaks.)


James Lawler , a medical doctor and co-executive director of the Global Center for Health Security at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, got the call on a Tuesday and was on a plane to Japan the next day, having plunked down a $35,000 government grant to buy 21 pressurized bio-containment suits.
"That’s a lot of extra carry-on bags," he says.

Because of the virus’s high fatality rate—as high as one to two percent—the team treated the entire cruise ship as a "hot zone," meaning they had to use the strictest infection control procedures.
A tent set up at the farthest end of the dock was used to remove and decontaminate or dispose of their gear upon stepping off the vessel.

Doctors scrutinized

Diamond Princess’

s manifest to identify American citizens and checked on each one, beginning with passengers most at-risk, including the elderly and those with conditions such as diabetes or mobility issues.
A pharmacist based in the ship’s library maintained radio contact, obtaining appropriate prescription refills from Japanese pharmacies.

Once cleared, 329 Americans wearing masks were then taken by bus to two cargo planes and flown to quarantine on military bases in the United States.
Eleven passengers would end up testing positive by the time they arrived and were flown on to Nebraska.
Three more would fall ill later.
An additional 111 Americans were either hospitalized in Japan or remained there for other reasons.

Overall, the

Diamond Princess

outbreak infected 712 passengers and killed 9.
Had the passengers been isolated and quarantined on February 3, those actions likely would have prevented at least 76 infections, according to an analysis in the

Journal of Travel Medicine

.

A passenger cheers as medical personnel begin to move travelers from the Grand Princess cruise ship onto airplanes at Oakland International Airport.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


"It was absolutely the right move to get Americans off," Lawler says.

The March 8 cruise ship evacuation of the

Grand Princess

, which began 50 miles off the coast of California, proved to be even more harrowing for rescue workers.
Amid rough waters, the medical team had to leap from a small Coast Guard vessel to a lifeboat and on to a ladder dangling from the cruise ship—all while wearing clumsy bio-containment suits.

"A mistake would have resulted in severe injury, or death from drowning or crushing injury between the two vessels," reads a government commendation letter given to Bryan Lovejoy, a nurse practitioner on that mission.

All aboard


In the six weeks since the

Grand Princess

medical evacuation, cruise ship quarantine procedures have changed as COVID-19 has become endemic in U.S. communities and as various states and localities have enacted social distancing measures.

Under CDC oversight, cruise lines are responsible for getting passengers safely into home quarantine through charter flights and buses.
Symptomatic and asymptomatic passengers are separated, while the Coast Guard and ambulances handle those needing medical evacuation.
With a vaccine not expected until next year, it remains unclear when cruises will be safe.
On April 15, the CDC’s no-sail order was extended for 100 days or until the agency rescinds it.
"With this pandemic, it’s really not advised to go on a cruise," says the CDC’s Friedman.

Princess Cruises, Holland America, and Carnival Cruises have canceled all their bookings through the middle of the summer, though reservations are reportedly up for 2021.
In a statement, Cruise Lines International Association said that "cruising is neither the source or cause of the virus or its spread" and that "it would be a false assumption to connect higher frequency and visibility in reporting to a higher frequency of infection."

(

Related: What to do if your vacation has been canceled.

)

Carolyn Wright, a Santa Fe, New Mexico-based photographer who was quarantined on the

Grand Princess

in Oakland in March, says that she and a friend have a reservation for a cruise in Germany this fall.

"I’m certainly not looking forward to the Viking Cruise like I was," she says.
"I don’t know if it’s going to happen."

Brendan Borrell lives in Los Angeles and writes about wild places and wild people.
Follow him on Twitter.



####
document number 11: 
China, Clear Lake Iowa, Jp Richardson discussed on Mac and Gaydos


Automatic TRANSCRIPT


Of the coronavirus outbreak

ABC

's Alex stone is the story of one family trying to get out so

John

is a twenty six year old teacher from

Minnesota

five years in the military and I get completely shafted years wife and infant son have not been allowed on U. S. evacuation flights because his wife is a Chinese national their stock and will on trying to get out blocking often quarantining off the city for a long time he's neighborhood he is pretty much empty stores are closed on the skin hues run around he and his family one out of

Wuhan

and like stone ABC news time now for a check of your money from ABC news Wall Street now stocks rose to start the week recovering some of their losses from the last few but still feeling the ill effects of a new strain of the corona virus the Dow rose a hundred forty four points the nasdaq closing up a hundred twenty two and the S. and P. adding twenty three for the session markets around the world are still reeling from the economic impact of the virus which is spread to more than twenty countries and has infected more than seventeen thousand people Monday was the first day of trading in more than a week in

Shanghai

the outlook threatens

China

's economy with much of the nation shut down many analysts have dropped their forecast for growth in the world's second largest economy to near five percent from earlier forecast of six percent for the year earning season rolls on alphabet reporting its fourth quarter earnings right after the close the parent company of

Google

posting mixed results that fell short of wall street's expectations for revenue but beat them on profit

Terry Alden

or ABC news for more money news go to the

KTA

our business center it KTAR dot com the case yeah our time line now with

Stevens Meister

is brought to you by the husband and wife law team a Briar law protecting the rights of the seriously injured in

Arizona

since nineteen ninety six it's February third in sixty one years ago today was the day the music died dad American rock and roll musicians Buddy

Holly Richie Valens

in the big bopper JP Richardson were killed in a plane crash near

Clear Lake Iowa

it was referenced in the song American pie Holly and his band were playing a tour across the Midwest the bus rides were long and cold causing the flu.



####
document number 12: 
Evacuating The Hurricane Zone | Stinky Chickens &amp;amp; Dodgy Motels


674 miles, 22 hours on the road, two dodgy motels and way too many stinky chickens to count.
Those were the highlights of our evacuation from Indiantown in southern Florida (it's near the east coast between Stuart and Lake Okeechobee) to Atlanta.

Okay, maybe highlights isn't exactly the right word.
They were more like lowlights.
Actually, lowlights is probably too nice of a description.

We had been monitoring Hurricane Irma's path for days, going back and forth as to whether we should stay or go.
It became an easier decision once we saw this projected track and the "cone of uncertainty" on Wednesday.
Indiantown Marina was smack dab in the middle of a major hurricane's path with projected wind gusts over 120 MPH.
Yep, it was time to make plans to head on out.


Before we could go, we had to finish prepping our sailboat, Tickety Boo, to ride out the storm.

If you're never prepped a boat for a hurricane, you're really missing out.
You get to do all sorts of exciting tasks like taking down the sails so that they didn't become unfurled in the high winds, taking down our bimini and dodger (the canvas over the cockpit that protects us from sun and rain), making sure everything was off of the deck, tying a thousand lines and fenders to our boat to make her as secure as possible in her slip, getting the solar panel off, removing the steering wheel, filling up our water tanks and jerry cans and doing a million other jobs that always took longer than we thought they would.

Not to mention we were working in hot, sticky weather with real feel temps over 100 degrees, while constantly swatting at bugs intent on extracting every last bit of blood from our bodies.
Maybe that's how they prep for hurricanes.
Humans stock up on food and water, they stock up on blood.
Good times.



We checked on some of our friends' boats which are stored on the hard.
They're tied down with hurricane straps so that they don't topple over in the high winds.
That's the theory at least.
Nobody really wants to test it out and see if it's true.


And the most important thing we did as part of boat prep was go out for a "last supper" with our friends from Sailing Wind Spirit and MJ Sailing on Thursday night.
It's becoming a bit of a tradition.
We did the same thing last year before Hurricane Matthew.
To be honest, it's the kind of tradition I'd rather not have.


We got up at 3:00 AM on Friday morning and did some final boat prep.
Then, after saying one last goodbye to Tickety Boo, we headed off at 5:00 AM northwards.
Our goal was to go northwest, into the Florida panhandle and out of the cone.

At first, the evacuation seemed to be going okay.
We drove west on the back roads to Okeechobee then up to Sebring and then on Route 27 up towards Minneola.
Not too much traffic, gas readily available and no stinky chickens.

But then things went downhill from there.
We made the fatal mistake of getting on the Florida turnpike over to I-75.
Did you know 6.3 million people were ordered to evacuate?
That doesn't even include people like us who voluntarily chose to evacuate.
That's a lot of people on the roads.
I think we met half of them on I-75.
It was pure insanity.

Needless to say we got off of I-75 near Ocala and got back onto the backroads.
That's when we started to notice some serious gas shortages.
We were still okay for gas, but it's a bit nerve wracking to wonder when and if you'll be able to fill up again.


Some of you know that we have a tiny travel trailer, Scamper and have asked if we took her.
We hemmed and hawed about what to do.
If we left her at Indiantown, we could lose not only our boat, but our camper and have no place whatsoever to live.
But if we took her, we'd really have to worry about gas towing her.
In the end we decided to leave her behind.
Given the gas shortages, it was probably a good call.

The backroads worked for a while and we were zipping along, singing songs and having a great time.
That might be a bit of an exaggeration - there wasn't any singing or having a great time, but we did go faster.
Then we got on Route 98.
It took us 1 hour and 20 minutes to go 5 miles.
{Sigh}

We got off of there as soon as we could and headed north on some county roads towards Live Oak.
This is the good thing about not having any firm plans or destination, you can be flexible.
The bad thing about not having any firm plans or destination is that when you go to try and book lodging, you find out that there is nothing to be had.
Not just where you are, but in all of northern Florida, Alabama and Georgia.

By the way, one disadvantage of taking the back roads is that you might find yourself stuck behind a truck carrying lots and lots of chickens.
We've got the old fashioned kind of air conditioning in our car - you know the kind that involves rolling the car windows down.
Nothing quite as refreshing as getting a big whiff of a chicken truck as you're driving along.
Turns out chickens don't smell great, especially when its really hot outside.


By the time we got to Live Oak, we were shattered beyond belief.
We were desperate for a place to stay.
Then we spotted a motel on the side of the road.
There was a reason why they had rooms available - it was dodgy and gross.
We decided to pass and keep on heading west into the panhandle.

We took Route 90 into Monticello.
A super cute town.
If only we weren't trying to flee from a hurricane, it would have been fun to explore.
We ran across yet another dodgy motel.
We checked out the room and it was gross, but for some reason, we handed the guy $60 and said that we'd take it.

Big mistake.
One of the clues should have been the fact that you have to hand your money through a hole in the window.
The other big clue was the fact that they normally rent rooms by the week or the month.

We dropped off some stuff and went for some fine dining at Burger King.
When we got back, I noticed the owner was evicting some of the residents.
Um, yeah, another big clue.
Then we looked at the room more carefully and took the bedspreads off.
What we saw took gross to a new level.
Plus, to be honest, I was a little scared our car might not be there in the morning.
We fled the scene and kept driving.

By this time, the cone was shifting west into the panhandle so we decided to go north into Georgia.
We contacted some friends of our who had offered us a place to stay in Atlanta and asked them if there offer was still good.
Thankfully, it was.

We took the backroads to Tifton and then got on I-75.
There were times that we were going 60 MPH and then there were times we were lucky to be going 5 MPH.
But in the end we made it to Atlanta and collapsed in a heap grateful to have a safe place to sleep.

Two important lessons learned:

1 - A dodgy motel is never a good idea no matter how exhausted you are.

2 - Don't drive behind trucks full of chickens.

But more importantly, we were reminded of how lucky we are.
Sure, we could lose our sailboat and our camper, but we have the financial resources and a car and were able to evacuate and great friends who were willing to shelter these Florida refugees.
There are so many other people who have been impacted by Irma, with no place to go and so many people whose lives have been devastated by her wrath.
Have you ever stayed at a dodgy motel?
What's the longest you've driven?
Have you been impacted by Hurricane Irma?

NOTE: If you've emailed or left comments on Facebook or our blog, apologies if I haven't responded.
The last several days have been crazy and exhausting.
I'll try to get around to it soon.

Thanks for stopping by our blog - we love it when people come visit!
We're also on Facebook - pop by and say hi!



####
document number 13: 
Pinellas nursing home evacuated after outbreak; 3 dead from coronavirus



SEMINOLE — Three nursing home residents have died of the coronavirus in an outbreak that has afflicted Freedom Square of Seminole, a sprawling retirement community that has seen dozens hospitalized because of the virus, officials said.

A 74-year-old man died April 10.
Then an 84-year-old woman and a 66-year-old man both died Friday, according to medical examiner records.

Hours after Friday’s deaths, ambulances started lining up outside the Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation nursing home.

State, local and company officials agreed to shut down the facility and evacuate the 39 remaining residents to local hospitals, according to the Pinellas County administrator’s office.

What happened in this nursing home reveals how quickly COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, can spread in a facility filled with those most vulnerable to it.
In a span of eight days, from the first confirmed diagnoses to Friday’s mass evacuation, a total of 95 residents were removed from the facility and three have now died.

But the outbreak didn’t become public until Wednesday, after the first death and first wave of evacuations.
The pandemic has hit senior care centers across the country particularly hard.
But in Florida, Gov.
Ron DeSantis has refused to disclose which of those facilities have confirmed cases of COVID-19.

"We extend our sincere condolences to the families and patients ... and our thoughts and prayers are with them at this difficult time," Freedom Square Executive director Michael Mason said in a statement sent Friday to the

Tampa Bay Times. "

Over this past week Freedom Square began an orderly and voluntary transfer of Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation patients who were asymptomatic but potentially exposed, symptomatic, or who had confirmed cases of COVID-19 to three local hospitals for treatment and monitoring."

Inside the nursing home, nurses told the

Times

they didn’t know how quickly the virus had spread inside the facility — but they knew the company wasn’t ready for it.

• • •

Freedom Square of Seminole is a retirement community of more than 700 residents at 7800 Liberty Lane.
The Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation nursing home is one of several buildings on its campus.

A nurse who has worked in all of the buildings there said the company has not been forthcoming in sharing information with employees, patients and their relatives.

Employees did not know about the gravity of the outbreak until the media reported the transfer of patients late Wednesday, said the nurse, who requested anonymity out of fear of job loss.

"They kept information from the patients and families," the nurse said.
"They have not told us anything about this until it blew up."

Freedom Square, the nurse said, has lacked masks and gowns for weeks and many nurses and certified nursing assistants have resorted to buying their own equipment — if they can find it.
Some employees are also wearing homemade or cloth masks because the company is not supplying N95 masks, the nurse said.

"You have to go to Walgreens," the nurse said.

As the outbreak has grown, the nurse said employees fear for their safety because protocols are not in place to minimize the virus spread such as disinfecting many common areas.

Then on Thursday, the company told employees they need to get tested for the virus.
Many have concerns about the spread because employees enter different parts of the buildings on the campus, the nurse said.

"People don’t feel safe," the worker said.
"Nurses are quitting."

Patient care has deteriorated as employees quit and supplies shrink, the worker said.

This account was relayed to Freedom Square’s parent company, Life Care Services of Iowa, which operates more than 130 properties, according to the website.

The company did not address the allegations in a statement to the

Times

.

• • •

The first confirmed case of a resident was a man hospitalized on April 5, according to the medical examiner.
He tested positive on April 9 for COVID-19.
He died on April 10.

Then on Tuesday, Freedom Square officials said they transferred 38 nursing home patients to three local hospitals.
Some were confirmed to have COVID-19, officials said, while others had symptoms or had come into contact with patients who displayed symptoms.

The outbreak didn’t become public until county officials revealed it Wednesday.
Freedom Square confirmed the hospitalizations on Thursday.
And information about the three deaths was not known until Friday, a week after the first death, when the

Times

obtained the medical examiner’s reports.

Freedom Square said on Thursday that 21 residents and six staffers had tested positive.
Mason sent a note to residents, their families and employees announcing that "in an abundance of caution," COVID-19 patients would be given "non-emergency transport" to local hospitals.

"This is not only good news for these residents, but it is also good news for the entire Freedom Square campus," he wrote in a letter obtained by the

Times

.

Pinellas County Commissioner Pat Gerard said she was told the facility was reluctant to transfer the patients to hospitals, but did so when they became overwhelmed by the outbreak.
In its statement, the retirement community said it transferred the patients to stop the spread of the virus and to focus on the remaining patients still living in the building.

Then came Friday’s evacuation.

"This will allow the facility and (Department of Health) to completely reset the facility’s infection control practices, decontaminate the site, provide additional training for staff, etc.," said a message the county administrator’s office sent to the Pinellas County Commission.

"On the advice of our partners, and out of an abundance of caution, at noon on Friday ... Freedom Square made the decision to transfer all remaining patients from Seminole Pavilion to local hospitals," Mason said in a statement to the

Times

.
"The families of all impacted residents have been contacted to let them know of the change in their loved one’s situation."

That afternoon, four ambulances started pulling up to the nursing home, each one taking a resident to a local hospital.
The ambulances returned to pick up more patients, and on it went through the evening.

A total of 95 patients have been transferred out of the nursing home, Mason said, and all were tested for the virus.
There have been 36 confirmed cases and six patients are awaiting the results of their tests.
There were 53 residents who tested negative.

The residents who tested positive, or showed symptoms, were taken to local hospitals.

But Mason’s statement did not address how many staffers were tested, and how many of those tests came back positive.

• • •

The first resident to die was Thomas Minichillo.
He was 74.

He arrived at Largo Medical Center on April 5 for a "mental status change," according to the medical examiner’s report.

At the time, he did not have flu-like symptoms.
Two days later, he was hypoxic — deprived of oxygen — and was intubated.
Doctors ordered a COVID-19 test.
On April 9, he tested positive.
He died, still intubated, at 2:27 p.m. on April 10.

Jean Israelson, 84, died Friday after a week of experiencing symptoms, according to a medical examiner’s report.

She was tested for COVID-19 on April 11.
She was experiencing shortness of breath and was transported to Largo Medical Center on Tuesday.
A laboratory confirmed Israelson had contracted COVID-19 before she died.

Daniel Lewis, 66, died Friday morning, a few hours after Israelson, according to a medical examiner’s report.

Lewis was taken Sunday from the nursing home to St.
Anthony’s Hospital, where medical staff confirmed he had COVID-19.
He was transferred to the Suncoast Hospice North Pinellas Care Center Wednesday.
He was pronounced dead at 9:30 a.m. Friday.

Lewis was admitted to the hospital in mid-February with chest pain, difficulty breathing and a history of serious lung disease, but records indicate that as many as eight weeks passed before he was tested for COVID-19.

His daughter, Melissa, told the medical investigator that her father lived in his own home until mid-February, when he was admitted to St.
Anthony’s, according to the report.
Daniel Lewis, a heavy smoker with a history of severe lung disease, was suffering from chest pain and difficulty breathing.

He was diagnosed with a mycobacterium infection, treated, and transferred to Carrington Place.
But he was admitted back to St.
Anthony’s 12 hours later with worsening symptoms.
Lewis was moved to Freedom Square for rehab on March 26.

He was tested at the nursing home for COVID-19 on April 10.
Two days later, his results came back positive.
He died five days after the positive test.

• • •

Family members, attorneys and advocates have sounded alarms about the delays in residents and the public being informed about the outbreak.

April Hill, an elder law attorney with Hill Law Group in St.
Petersburg, said one of her clients hadn’t heard anything until reports of the coronavirus outbreak hit the news.
When the news became public, they got a generic phone call saying there were a few positive cases.

The client’s family member is in independent living at Freedom Square, which is housed in a separate building from the rehab center, Hill said.

She said her client felt like they were being left in the dark.

"They’re not feeling like Freedom Square is being open or honest with them," Hill said.

Beth Woods of Chicago said her family is worried about her father, a Freedom Square resident who tested positive for COVID-19 and was transferred to a local hospital.

The family, Woods said, has not been able to get much information from Freedom Square.

She said they got several calls from staff on Thursday but "an employee couldn’t give me any specific information about my father or when he was tested or what he knew about his condition."

"We still haven’t spoken with my father," Woods said, "and not a single word from Freedom Square today."

She praised the care and communication from the staff at Morton Plant Hospital.
Woods said her family is learning more from the media than Freedom Square.

"Whatever they’re doing there is a complete cover up," Woods told the

Times

about Freedom Square.
"What’s happening now is not humane."

HAVE YOU LOST SOMEONE YOU LOVE TO COVID-19?
: Help us remember them

CONTRIBUTE TO THE SCRAPBOOK: Help us tell the story of life under coronavirus

BRIGHT SPOTS IN DARK TIMES: The world is hard right now, but there’s still good news out there

LISTEN TO THE CORONAVIRUS PODCAST: New episodes every week, including interviews with experts and reporters

GET THE DAYSTARTER MORNING UPDATE: Sign up to receive the most up-to-date information, six days a week

We’re working hard to bring you the latest news on the coronavirus in Florida.
This effort takes a lot of resources to gather and update.
If you haven’t already subscribed,


please consider buying a print or digital subscription.



####
document number 14: 
2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami: Facts, FAQs, and how to help







Days after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, a man in Banda Aceh, Indonesia, scavenged the rubble for usable items.
In Indonesia’s Aceh province on the island of Sumatra, about 170,000 people were killed by the massive ocean waves.
(©2005 World Vision/photo by Jon Warren)





A powerful undersea earthquake that struck off the coast of Sumatra island, Indonesia, set off the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, also known as the Christmas or Boxing Day tsunami, on Sunday morning, Dec.
26, 2004.
The magnitude 9.1 quake ruptured a 900-mile stretch of fault line where the Indian and Australian tectonic plates meet.
It was a powerful megathrust quake, occurring where a heavy ocean plate slips under a lighter continental plate.

The quake caused the ocean floor to suddenly rise by as much as 40 meters, triggering a massive tsunami.
Within 20 minutes of the earthquake, the first of several 100-foot waves hit the shoreline of Banda Aceh, killing more than 100,000 people and pounding the city into rubble.
Then, in succession, tsunami waves rolled over coastlines in Thailand, India, and Sri Lanka, killing tens of thousands more.
Eight hours later and 5,000 miles from its Asian epicenter, the tsunami claimed its final casualties on the coast of South Africa.
In all, nearly 230,000 people were killed, making it one of the deadliest disasters in modern history.

Since the 2004 tsunami, governments and aid groups have prioritized disaster risk reduction and preparedness.
Only three weeks after the tsunami, representatives of 168 nations agreed to the Hyogo Framework for Action, which paved the way for global cooperation for disaster risk reduction.
Since then, ocean floor earthquake sensors have been installed to trigger early warnings, and many local communities have been trained in evacuation and disaster response.

Major earthquakes and tsunamis in August and September 2018 have tested Indonesia’s ability to respond and recover.
Then, in December 2018, Anak Krakatau volcano’s ongoing eruptions in the Sunda Strait caused undersea landslides that triggered a tsunami that struck beaches in both Sumatra and Java.
With no warning triggered by the volcanic activity, more than 400 people died.
Now, the Indonesian government is working to add volcano sensors to its warning systems.

When disaster strikes, World Vision is there.
Help us respond to disasters like earthquakes and tsunamis.


FAQs: What you need to know about the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami


Explore facts and frequently asked questions about the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, and learn how you can help survivors of disasters.

Fast facts: 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami


The Sumatra-Andaman earthquake, which caused the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, is estimated to have released energy equivalent to 23,000 Hiroshima-type atomic bombs.


In Banda Aceh, the landmass closest to the quake’s epicenter, tsunami waves topped 100 feet.


The tsunami’s waves traveled across the Indian Ocean at 500 mph, the speed of a jet plane.


The 2004 Indonesia earthquake caused a shift in the Earth’s mass that changed the planet’s rotation.


Total material losses from the tsunami were estimated at $10 million.



How many people died in the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami?


Nearly 230,000 people died in the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, making it one of the deadliest disasters in modern history.

Why was the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami so destructive and deadly?


The first giant waves from the Indian Ocean tsunami reached Banda Aceh, a city of about 300,000 people within 15 or 20 minutes after the earthquake.
Few residents of the densely populated area realized that the earthquake they had felt could cause a tsunami, and there was little time to flee to higher ground.

Traveling as fast as 500 mph, the waves spread out to distant countries including Thailand, Sri Lanka, and India.
With no warning, coastal populations were caught by the pounding waves.
Many families that made their living fishing lost everything; whole communities were wiped out by the tsunami.

©2005 image courtesy of the U.S. Geological Survey


Where did the earthquake hit?


The Sumatra-Andaman earthquake struck 150 miles from the coast of Sumatra island, on the northwest of the Indonesian island group, and 31 miles below the ocean floor.
The quake occurred along a fault line between the Indian tectonic plate and the Burma microplate, part of the Australian plate.
The Indian plate is a heavy ocean plate, and it slipped under the lighter coastal plate, rupturing a 900-mile length of the fault.

Indonesia lies between the Pacific Ring of Fire, where 90% of earthquakes occur, and the second-most active seismic zone, the Alpide belt.

How big was the earthquake that caused the Indian Ocean tsunami?


The earthquake’s magnitude was measured between 9.1 and 9.3, making it the third-most powerful quake since 1900.
Magnitude is a measure of the release of energy at the earthquake’s source.

In the worst-affected areas, the quake’s intensity rated IX on the Mercalli scale, the second highest rating possible.
So the quake caused violent shaking and extensive damage to even well-built buildings.
Earthquake intensity is based on observation and varies in different places.

How can I help people affected by earthquakes and tsunamis?


Give: Donate to World Vision’s disaster relief fund to bring help when another disaster strikes.


Pray: Join us in praying for families as they recover and rebuild after earthquakes and other disasters:

Almighty Father, we ask for Your caring mercy on people hard hit by natural disasters, including earthquakes and tsunamis.
In the midst of their struggle to recover, give them patience, peace, and hope that their lives will continue to improve.



How did World Vision help people recover from the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami?


In response to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, World Vision mounted its largest-ever relief response across five countries simultaneously — Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, India, and Myanmar — and raised more than $350 million.

World Vision focused on the needs of children, families, and their communities, with programs to provide protection, healthcare, education, and livelihoods.
We provided training and employment opportunities to 40,000 people, child-rights awareness sessions for more than 27,000 people, educational support for more than 2,000 teachers and 137,000 children, and implemented community-level disaster risk reduction programs.

World Vision built 12,000 homes, 200 Child-Friendly Spaces, 84 schools, 60 playgrounds, and 27 health clinics.
We built roads, bridges, farms, factories, marketplaces, boat-building centers, and restored a fishing harbor.
Our coastal restoration programs included planting 56,000 mangroves to serve as a natural barrier to rising ocean levels.

Most tsunami-related rehabilitation work was completed by 2007.
Today, World Vision’s expansive child sponsorship, health, education, water, food, agriculture, and income-generating activities are found across each of the tsunami-affected countries.

How does World Vision help people prepare for disasters?


World Vision pre-positions relief supplies and trains staff for emergency work in areas like child protection, relief supply chain management, clean water provision, and more.
In disaster-prone communities where we work, we organize programs to reduce risks from disasters and train local first responders.

In nearly 100 countries around the world, World Vision works to improve the lives of children and families and to help them prepare for and recover from disasters.

2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami timeline


7:58 a.m.: A magnitude 9.1 earthquake occurs off the northwest coast of Sumatra.


+15 minutes: The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii registers the quake.


+20 to 30 minutes: Tsunami waves more than 100 feet high pound the Banda Aceh coast, killing about 170,000 people and destroying buildings and infrastructure.


+1.5 hours: Beaches in southern Thailand are hit by the tsunami.
Among the 5,400 who died were 2,000 foreign tourists.


+2 hours: The tsunami strikes the Sri Lankan coastline from the northeast and all around the southern tip; more than 30,000 people are dead or missing.
The east coast of India is hard hit from Chennai south; more than 16,000 people are killed.


+8 hours: The tsunami reaches the east coast of Africa, killing more than 300 people in Somalia, Tanzania, and Kenya.



Learn more about earthquakes and tsunamis, which are among the most damaging and deadly disasters.



####
document number 15: 
83 patients evacuated from Riverside skilled nursing home after coronavirus outbreak


A patient at the Magnolia Rehabilitation and Nursing Center in Riverside is evacuated to a waiting ambulance Wednesday morning April 8, 2020.
(Photo by Will Lester, Inland Valley Daily Bulletin/SCNG)


Eighty-three patients in a Riverside skilled nursing facility were evacuated Wednesday, April 8, after employees of the facility with confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus did not show up to care for sick patients two days in a row, Riverside County officials said.

Residents of Magnolia Rehabilitation and Nursing Center, on Magnolia Avenue near Adams Street, were moved to other locations across Riverside County, a county public health news release stated.

Just one certified nursing assistant out of 13 scheduled to work showed up at Magnolia Rehabilitation, forcing the county-run Riverside University Health System and Kaiser Permanente to send 33 licensed vocational nurses and registered nurses to the center, the release read.

At a Wednesday afternoon news conference in Riverside, Dr.
Cameron Kaiser, the county’s public health officer, said he learned Friday, April 3, of two center employees testing positive for COVID-19.
Before that, the county was investigating COVID-19 cases next door at Extended Care Hospital of Riverside, which county spokeswoman Brooke Federico said has a different owner than Magnolia Rehabilitation.

To date, 26 staff members at Extended Care have tested positive for the virus, with 48 testing negative and 28 employee tests pending, Kaiser said.
Twenty-eight patients tested positive and 58 were negative, he said.

At Magnolia Rehabilitation, 16 staff members have tested positive so far, six were negative and 130 employee tests are pending, Kaiser said.
Thirty-four center patients tested positive and 47 tested negative, he added.

On Monday, Kaiser said he learned of a large staffing request by Magnolia Rehabilitation that was considered "unusual."
The center reported that a "substantial" portion of staff were not reporting to work, he said.

Because the center could not sufficiently staff Wednesday’s day shift, Kaiser said he used his emergency authority to evacuate the facility "to safeguard the well being of residents and ensure an appropriate continuity of care."

"Nationwide, all of our health care workers are considered heroes and they rightly are," Kaiser said.
"They are the first line of defense in our hospitals, our clinics, our laboratories, our pharmacies and our long-term facilities.
But implicit in that heroism is that people stay at their post."

He added: "I am concerned this could rise to the level of abandonment, no matter how justified the reasoning might be, and the state licensing board will have to determine (that)."

One patient on hospice died Wednesday morning before being transported, Kaiser said, adding the on-site physician believes the patient’s death was imminent because of previously existing medical issues.

At least 15 center patients were taken to a Palm Desert skilled nursing facility, seven to Riverside University Health System – Medical Center in Moreno Valley, five to local hospitals and 28 to a special field hospital at the county fairgrounds in Indio, said Bruce Barton, county emergency management director.

Patients were still waiting to be transported from the center late Wednesday afternoon, he said.
Fifty-three ambulances were used in the evacuation, Barton added.

Kaiser said he didn’t know exactly how many center employees failed to show for work, or whether their actions could lead to criminal charges.
Kaiser added he was not aware of any issues employees might have had getting personal protective equipment to work in the center.

California Magnolia Convalescent Hospital Inc.
owns Magnolia Rehabilitation and the center has an active license, according to the state Department of Public Health.
Secretary of State records list Larry Joe Mays as the company’s president.

A voicemail left at a cell phone number listed for Mays was not returned.
Kimberly Richards, listed in state business records as a member of the company’s board of directors, declined to comment Wednesday.

The skilled nursing facilities receiving Magnolia Rehabilitation patients will be closed off to new patients, according to the county.
Also, staff at those facilities will not be allowed to work elsewhere, sick patients will be isolated, all employees will use personal protective equipment and staff will closely monitor patients.

As of Wednesday afternoon, the county had 1,179 confirmed coronavirus cases and 32 deaths.
It’s not clear whether the Magnolia Rehabilitation cases are part of that total or need to be added to the county’s case numbers.

Family members can call 951-358-5134 to check the status of loved ones at Magnolia Rehabilitation.

This is the latest outbreak of the virus at a Riverside County nursing home.
Besides Extended Care, a former resident of a skilled nursing home in Rancho Mirage contracted the virus and later died and a vendor who did contract work at the facility also tested positive.

On Tuesday, Kaiser warned of a surge in COVID-19 cases in the county’s long-term care and skilled nursing facilities.

In neighboring San Bernardino County, nursing facilities also have seen many cases.

Seventy-five residents and employees at Cedar Mountain Post-Acute Rehabilitation in Yucaipa tested positive for the coronavirus.
And eight residents and seven employees tested positive at Reche Canyon Rehabilitation Health Care Center in Colton.
Five residents of the Yucaipa facility and one at the Colton facility have died.

San Bernardino County officials created a task force and issued new orders to slow the spread of COVID-19 at the 171 state licensed nursing facilities across the county.

Staff photographer Will Lester contributed to this report.


CASES BY COMMUNITY

Here’s a list of coronavirus cases in Riverside County by city and unincorporated community.
This list may include some small unincorporated communities that Riverside County is not listing on its coronavirus dashboard.


Anza: 5 cases, 0 deaths


Banning: 46 cases, 1 death


Beaumont: 23 cases, 1 death


Bermuda Dunes: 3 cases, 0 deaths


Blythe: 2 cases, 0 deaths


Calimesa: 3 cases, 0 deaths


Canyon Lake: 4 cases, 0 deaths


Cathedral City: 37 cases, 1 death


Cherry Valley: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Coachella: 40 cases, 0 deaths


Corona: 52 cases, 2 deaths


Desert Edge: 2 cases, 0 deaths


Desert Hot Springs: 11 cases, 0 deaths


Desert Palms: 3 cases, 0 deaths


East Hemet: 2 cases, 0 deaths


Eastvale: 31 cases, 2 deaths


El Cerrito: 4 cases, 0 deaths


El Sobrante: 10 cases, 0 deaths


French Valley: 13 cases, 0 deaths


Garnet: 3 cases, 0 deaths


Good Hope: 4 cases, 0 deaths


Green Acres: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Hemet: 21 cases, 0 deaths


Home Gardens: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Homeland: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Idyllwild-Pine Cove: 3 cases, 0 deaths


Indian Wells: 9 cases, 0 deaths


Indio: 58 cases, 2 deaths


Jurupa Valley: 20 cases, 0 deaths


La Quinta: 28 cases, 0 deaths


Lake Elsinore: 34 cases, 1 death


Lake Mathews: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Lakeland Village: 2 cases, 0 deaths


Mead Valley: 9 cases, 0 deaths


Meadowbrook: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Mecca: 4 cases, 0 deaths


Menifee: 41 cases, 1 death


Moreno Valley: 121 cases, 4 deaths


Murrieta: 47 cases, 1 death


Norco: 6 cases, 0 deaths


Nuevo: 3 cases, 0 deaths


Oasis: 3 cases, 0 deaths


Palm Desert: 51 cases, 2 deaths


Palm Springs: 60 cases, 8 deaths


Perris: 46 cases, 0 deaths


Rancho Mirage: 18 cases, 3 deaths


Riverside: 128 cases, 1 death


San Jacinto: 10 cases, 0 deaths


Sky Valley: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Temecula: 54 cases, 0 deaths


Temescal Valley: 6 cases, 0 deaths


Thermal: 2 cases, 0 deaths


Thousand Palms: 2 cases, 0 deaths


Valle Vista: 1 cases, 0 deaths


Wildomar: 21 cases, 1 death


Woodcrest: 5 cases, 0 deaths




####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = peaceful demonstration
document number 1: 
Riot in banlieue as school students protest against CPE


Between 300 - 500 pupils of the Eugene Delacroix High School had gathered for an anti-CPE demonstration.
Three vehicles were set fire to and a bus shelter was damaged in the clashes.
There was one arrest.
According to the police force, the incidents lasted 3 hours.

Drancy is located in Seine-Saint-Denis, a department in the north-western periphery of Paris where the wave of urban violence which struck the French suburbs, last November started.



####
document number 2: 
Hours after peaceful Worcester protest ends, police in riot gear fire pepper spray as crowd throws rocks at officers, sets off fireworks



Editor’s note: This article has been updated to note that Worcester police used smoke grenades and pepperball rounds, not rubber bullets.


Hours after a peaceful protest had ended, police were in a stand-off with a group of people who marched into the Main South neighborhood of Worcester Monday night.
The group began marching down Main Street sometime around 11 p.m.

The group was met by police officers on Hammond Street, where they took a knee and chanted "Black Lives Matter" and held signs in front of a police vehicle.


Police outfitted in riot gear arrived on the scene and formed a barricade between Hammond and Main Streets.
The officers then began to move toward the crowd repeating, "Move back, Move back."


The crowd was dispersed in two separate directions with some heading up Hammond Street and others continuing down Main Street.

The crowd on Main Street later would start to set off fireworks and throw rocks toward the officers dressed in riot gear.
Glass bottles were thrown at police cruisers.
At one point, the bumper of a Worcester police cruiser caught on fire.
A person was seen lighting a fire in bushes in front of the Main Street Dunkin'.

People in the crowd shouted to the police, "Hands up, don’t shoot."

Police fired smoke grenades and pepperball rounds, which dispense oleoresin capsicum, the same ingredient found in pepper spray, into the crowd of about 70 people.

There were reports of people getting on top of the PennyWise Market on May Street.
One Clark University police cruiser had its windows smashed in.

Some participants claim police boxed in the group and gave them no outlet to leave.

Fireworks were still being set off in the streets as of midnight as police and the crowd remained in the street Tuesday morning.

A SWAT team arrived in the area at one point.

People could be seen being taken into custody by police.


Officers rushed to EbLens, a clothing and sneaker store, on Park Avenue for a report of looting.
At least one person was taken into custody there.

Merchandise from the store could be seen in the parking lot.

Around 12:40 a.m. Main Street had cleared out.
The police in riot gear lingered for a bit before leaving.


A peaceful protest where people gathered in solidarity over the death of George Floyd took place earlier Monday.
The Worcester Common was packed with thousands of people.
The group eventually made their way to the Worcester courthouse on Main Street where the protest continued.

At one point, police took a knee with the protesters.
The early evening event ended without any issues.

Riots broke out in major cities across the United States as people protested the death of Floyd.

In Boston, police arrested 53 people after violence erupted Sunday night.
The violence came after the organized protests ended in the city.

Floyd, a 46-year-old unarmed black man, died May 25 after a white Minneapolis police officer kneeled on his neck for more than eight minutes, even after he had passed out, according to authorities.
Derek Chauvin, the police officer, has since been charged with murder and manslaughter.



####
document number 3: 
Canadian company recycles minerals from electric vehicle batteries


'There's opportunity there to reuse those materials, make them as good as new.'


(Image credit: Li-Cycle Corp.
video)



As electric vehicles become more mainstream, the demand for lithium ion car batteries is growing.
But to increase production, the industry needs more lithium, cobalt, and nickel.

One possible source is batteries that are no longer in use.

"It’s a bit of a waste to just have batteries sitting in a landfill.
And there’s opportunity there to reuse those materials, make them as good as new," says Kunal Phalpher of Li-Cycle.

Li-Cycle uses a two-step process to recover more than 80% of the materials in old lithium ion batteries.

"We take the batteries and shred them," Phalpher says.
"And then phase two of the process is then to take that mixed material and separate each of the elements through chemical processing."

The approach generates less carbon pollution than mining those minerals from the ground.
And it solves another problem the booming industry is grappling with: how to safely and sustainably dispose of spent batteries.

Li-Cycle has a demonstration plant in Canada, and Phalpher says it’s building a new facility in Rochester, New York.
Last December, the company shipped its first commercial load of recycled battery material to a customer – a critical milestone on the road to addressing this global challenge.

Reporting credit: ChavoBart Digital Media.



####
document number 4: 
The Anti-War Protest And The Police



Capitol of capitalism that it is, New York will continue as a likely target of terrorism so long as it remains rich and powerful.
But it is also the international center of media and communications, enterprises that depend on liberty of person and freedom of movement.
It is the place to which those with a message come to get their views known and covered.
Freedom is at the very core of New York and its success.
Its police department historically has understood this, despite the pressures this often puts on police work.

So it may be that New York's officials were simply caught unaware in late January when an aggressive antiwar coalition (United for Peace Justice) wanting to march up the East Side to the United Nations, asked for a permit, which the city denied.
The city cited insufficient time and resources to prepare for a march that would pose "an unacceptable risk to public safety."

In early February U.S. District Court Judge Barbara Jones agreed, noting the federal government's orange (Level 2) terror alert and general post-9/11 security concerns.
A protest rally would be permitted, but not a protest march.

But judicially upholding the denial of a permit for a protest march was unprecedented, according to Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York City Civil Liberties Union.
In their appeal of Judge Jones's decision before the U.S. Court of Appeals, 2nd Circuit, the New York Civil Liberties Union argued that "For decades people in New York City have paraded and marched through the public streets as a means of expressing and demonstrating their views on a wide variety of topics.
Marching in the streets is a time-honored tradition in our country that lies at the core of the First Amendment."

The Court of Appeals upheld the city's denial of the permit, but sternly noted that its ruling applied to this one event only: "We do not imply that a prohibition against marching would be constitutional in circumstances other than those presented here.
We caution that, while short notice, lack of detail, administrative convenience and costs are always relevant considerations, these factors are not talismanic justifications for the denial of parade permits.
Likewise, simply offering an alternative of stationary demonstration may not completely serve the constitutional interest at issue."

The court is warning the city that in the future, as in the past, it will again be expected to handle demonstrations, even those that are belated, inconvenient, and costly.

A BAD TIME WAS HAD BY ALL

The demonstration was held on Saturday, February 15, and few have had anything good to say about the experience.
The New York Police Department had approached the demonstration as if it were a military operation, thinking containment and control.
Police first herded people towards the stage near Dag Hammarskjold Plaza at the northern part of the United Nations, then blocked them from exiting.
They shut off access from the side streets, driving demonstrators north on Second and Third Avenues.
Large numbers of people were forced to take streets whose exits turned out to be barricaded.
The New York Times noted that part of the confusion stemmed from the NYPD moving the entrance to the rally northward as each block of First Avenue filled, progressing from 51st Street up to 74th Street.
Many protestors felt hemmed in, ineffective, and scared -- some apprehensive of the surging crowds, others of the police, many unable to free themselves even to leave.
The police strategy kept many protestors from protesting.

On the following Monday the protest's organizers ran a 7-minute videotape produced by the Independent Media Center showing questionable police behavior -- backing horses into demonstrators, shoving people into the metal barricades, spraying something toxic at penned-in demonstrators, using abusive language, and raising nightsticks against some who couldn't move.
NYPD spokesman Michael O'Looney said the tape was "filled with special effects," and that it did not show whether cops had been provoked.

The NYPD said very few protesters were injured and few arrested -- roughly 275, which is regarded as low for an event of at least 100,000 people, and perhaps as many as 400,000, according to the organizers.
The organizers also disagreed with NYPD estimates of arrests and put the number at 348.

Commentary has been almost universally negative.
New York Times columnist Joyce Purnick noted, for example, that the "last time we looked, the right to assemble did not mean the right to be splintered into small clusters of people kept far from the action."
Newsday's Jimmy Breslin attacked the NYPD's "disgraceful performance," of penning in "throngs of smiling people as if they were cattle.
It wasn't the cops' idea to do it.
All they did was carry out orders as poorly as possible."

WHAT LIES AHEAD

Do protest marches have inherent dangers to worry both marchers and officials?
Absolutely yes, as anyone who has ever marched knows.
Things can always go wrong in a crowd, even one made up of well-intentioned people.
Something scary happens, the crowd surges, some get trapped against a barrier such as a plate glass window, people get hurt, sometimes very badly.

And a crowd isn't necessarily composed of good guys.
Crowds are easily infiltrated by malevolent intruders -- whether FBI agents during the 1960s or terrorists today -- as well as by morons, such as the person who set off firecrackers on Feb.
15, alarming the police horses.

Worse, the world has changed since 9/11, and all political groups are going to have to adjust.
The symbols that make for a vital protest, such as the UN or the Statute of Liberty, have been made virtually off limits by their new status as terror targets.
The UN had been one of the targets in the 1993 terrorist plot to blow up five New York landmarks simultaneously.
That plot was thwarted and several men convicted and imprisoned, but city officials would be irresponsible to disregard the UN's status as an international symbol.

Even such mundane matters as portable toilets can become a serious issue in these new times.
Although the police refusal to permit them produced huge problems for the protest's organizers, few would deny that a Porto-San is a perfect hiding place for a bomb.
Yet now the issue becomes: which of its repressive procedures will the police apply to future marches and parades?

Will the St.
Patrick's parade, for example, suddenly find itself without toilets?
Unlikely.

Indeed, the often-mentioned upcoming St.
Patrick's Day parade has produced its humorous moments.
Trying to distinguish the city's insistence that it had to deny a permit for a protest march from its insistence on issuing a permit for the St.
Patrick's Day Parade, NYPD Assistant Chief Michael D. Esposito said that St.
Patrick's and Puerto Rican Day marchers "step out in a timed manner and proceed at a set pace."
Few New Yorkers outside the police department would cite these two parades as models of decorum.

As Donna Lieberman points out , the police department has a new policy of denying permits for political demonstrations of more than 1000 people even as it routinely permits raucous "traditional" parades.
Does this make sense?

The February 15 anti-war march was a world event, held in great cities and small, but not New York.
Yes, New York is New York, and therefore likely to get more aggressive protestors.
And, yes, New York is a target of terrorists.
But it is also an international symbol of freedom, and a city that has always triumphed over its enemies.
If it forbids demonstrations and protesters as if it were just a normal city unaccustomed to dealing with world events, it will erode not only its preeminence as the world's capital city but its own sense of itself as a place that takes on all comers.

POLICE ASK FOR MORE SURVEILLANCE AUTHORITY

Meanwhile, even as the police department has been telling two federal judges that it cannot safely handle a protest march, it has been urging another federal judge, Charles S. Haight of Federal District Court in Manhattan, to expand its surveillance authority of political groups.
Judge Haight agreed on Feb.
11 to modify a 1985 court order restricting surveillance, which the police department said hampered its ability to investigate terrorism.
In early March, Judge Haight will announce modified rules, most likely permitting the police to operate much like the FBI.
The department is asking to investigate political groups even without having evidence of criminal activity, and to share all information with other law enforcement agencies.
While Judge Haight retained the three-member oversight board that investigates specific complaints of abusive police investigations, he de-fanged it.

"The Constitution's protections are unchanging," he wrote, "but the nature of public peril can change with dramatic speed, as recent events show."

POLICE AND IMMIGRATION SERVICE ACCUSE ONE ANOTHER

Yet somehow nothing is simple.
It was revealed last month that of the five suspects in a brutal December 19 gang rape of a woman in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, four were illegal aliens with criminal records.
So why were they still enjoying the welcome of the U.S.?
It turned out that messy relations between the New York Police Department and the federal Immigration Naturalization Service may have been to blame.

A 1989 Koch administration order prohibited cops from informing the immigration service of an illegal alien's arrest.
The rationale was that otherwise illegal aliens would not call in the police to deal in immigrant neighborhoods.
But that rule was superseded by a 1996 federal law that encouraged police departments to inform the immigration agency of crimes committed by illegal aliens.
Only illegal aliens convicted of felonies are to be deported -- but one of the four was indeed convicted of a felony and an police detective informed the Immigration, according to the mayor's coordinator of criminal justice.
A congressional committee is holding hearings to investigate, among other matters, whether the Koch executive order that protects aliens and provides them emergency health care also inappropriately discourages the police from reporting crimes.

Julia Vitullo-Martin, a long-time editor and writer on urban affairs, is the former director of the Citizens Jury Project at the Vera Institute of Justice.
She is now writing a book entitled The Conscience of the American Jury.



####
document number 5: 
A weekend of protests and riots erupt across the nation demanding justice for George Floyd


watch now

Protests in response to the death of George Floyd rocked the U.S. this past weekend.
Demonstrations took place in major cities like New York, Los Angeles and Chicago, as well as in Minneapolis, where Floyd died on May 25 after police officer Derek Chauvin knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes during his arrest.

Chauvin was later removed from the Minneapolis police force, and has since been charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter.
However, with Floyd’s death following the police shooting of Breonna Taylor in Louisville, Kentucky, in March and multiple other incidents, protesters are calling for an end to police brutality against black Americans.

While some marches went smoothly, others erupted into violence as protesters and police squared off.
Facing widespread looting, arrests and destruction, cities like Philadelphia and Atlanta implemented curfews and at least 12 states activated the National Guard.

This national crisis comes as the country continues to grapple with the coronavirus pandemic, which has claimed the lives of more than 104,000 people in the U.S., according to data from Johns Hopkins University.
These packed protests have stoked fears that they will help the virus spread and make the outbreak even worse.

Here is a collection of photos that illustrate what happened at these protests as demonstrators demanded justice and fought for change:

Brooklyn, N.Y.


Hundreds of protesters made their way toward Barclays Center in Brooklyn to demonstrate against police brutality, May 29, 2020.

Erik McGregor | Getty Images

Washington, D.C.


Military Police face off with protesters across from the White House on May 30, 2020 in Washington DC.

Andrew Caballero-Reynolds | AFP | Getty Images

Boston


Protesters confront police during clashes in Boston, Massachusetts on May 31, 2020.

Joseph Prezioso | AFP | Getty Images

Minneapolis


Law enforcement officers take position during a protest in Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S., May 30, 2020.

Lucas Jackson | Reuters

Chicago


Protesters clash with police in Chicago, on May 30, 2020 during a protest against the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who died while while being arrested and pinned to the ground by the knee of a Minneapolis police officer.

Jim Vondruska | NurPhoto | Getty Images

Washington, D.C.


A person loots a T-Mobile store near the White House in Washington on Friday, May 29, 2020.

Caroline Brehman | CQ-Roll Call | Getty Images

Los Angeles


Los Angeles Police Department commander Cory Palka stands among several destroyed police cars as one explodes while on fire during a protest over the death of George Floyd, Saturday, May 30, 2020, in Los Angeles.

Mark J. Terrill | AP

Minneapolis


A man rides a bicycle up to a law enforcement checkpoint after the city endured a night of protests and violence on May 29, 2020 in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Scott Olson | Getty Images

Salt Lake City


An armed protester walks past a flipped over police vehicle Saturday, May 30, 2020, in Salt Lake City.

Rick Bowmer | AP

New York City


A protester vandalizes an NYPD van near Union Square on May 30, 2020 in New York City.
Demonstrations are being held across the US after George Floyd died in police custody on May 25th.

Kevin Mazur

Washington, D.C.


A firecracker thrown by protesters explodes under police one block from the White House on May 30, 2020 in Washington DC.

Andrew Caballero-Reynolds | AFP | Getty Images

Miami


Demonstrators participate in a protest against police brutality and the recent death of George Floyd, on May 31, 2020 in Miami, Florida.

Joe Raedle | Getty Images

Minneapolis


A tanker truck drives into thousands of people on 35W North Bound highway during a protests over the death of George Floyd on Sunday, May 31, 2020, in Minneapolis, MN.

Salwan Georges | The Washington Post | Getty Images

Seattle


A person holding a phone walks past burning vehicles in Seattle, Washington on May 30, 2020.

JASON REDMOND

Atlanta


A young boy raises his fist for a photo by a family friend during a demonstration on May 31, 2020 in Atlanta, Georgia.

Elijah Nouvelage | Getty Images

St.
Paul, Minn.


Protesters and National Guardsmen face off on East Lake Street, Friday, May 29, 2020, in St.
Paul, Minn.

John Minchillo | AP

New York City


Officers pursue protesters as they march around downtown on Saturday May 30, 2020 in New York City, NY.

Jabin Botsford | The Washington Post | Getty Images

Atlanta


Protesters set a police vehicle on fire during a protest following the death of George Floyd outside of the CNN Center next to Centennial Olympic Park in downtown Atlanta, Georgia, United States on May 29, 2020.

Ben Hendren | Anadolu Agency | Getty Images

Minneapolis


A demonstrator is arressted during a protest against police brutality and the death of George Floyd, on May 31, 2020 in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Scott Olson | Getty Images

Philadelphia


People leave a hardware store with merchandise on May 31, 2020 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Mark Makela | Getty Images

Ferguson, Mo.


Volunteers help cleanup from an overnight clash between protesters and law enforcement at the Ferguson Police Department on May 31, 2020 in Ferguson, Missouri.

Michael B.
Thomas | Getty Images

Washington, D.C.


A man holds up his fist during a protest near the White House on May 31, 2020 in Washington, DC.

Alex Wong | Getty Images

Chicago


Protesters clash with police in Chicago, on May 30, 2020 during a protest against the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who died while while being arrested and pinned to the ground by the knee of a Minneapolis police officer.

Jim Vondruska | NurPhoto | Getty Images

Coral Gables, Fla.


Police officers kneel during a rally in Coral Gables, Florida on May 30, 2020 in response to the recent death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who died while being arrested and pinned to the ground by a Minneapolis police officer.

Eva Marie Uzcategui | AFP | Getty Images

Washington, D.C.


A protester throws a US flag into a burning barricade during a demonstration near the White House on May 31, 2020 in Washington, DC.

Roberto Schmidt | AFP | Getty Images

Atlanta


Police detain demonstrators for being in the street during a protest in response to the police killing of George Floyd on May 30, 2020 in Atlanta, Georgia.

Elijah Nouvelage

Los Angeles


A demonstrator kicks a damaged police vehicle in Los Angeles on May 30, 2020 following a protest against the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who died while while being arrested and pinned to the ground by the knee of a Minneapolis police officer.

Ariana Drehsler | AFP | Getty Images

Atlanta


People protest outside the CNN Center on May 29, 2020 in Atlanta, Georgia.
Demonstrations are being held across the U.S. after George Floyd died in police custody on May 25th in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Elijah Nouvelage | Getty Images

Los Angeles


A demonstrator confronts police in Los Angeles, California on May 29, 2020.

Mark Ralston | AFP | Getty Imgaes

Bellevue, Wash.


Bellevue Police Chief Steve Mylett hugs a demonstrator during a gathering to protest the recent death of George Floyd on May 31, 2020 in Bellevue, Washington.

David Ryder | Getty Images

Minneapolis


Flowers, signs and balloons are left near a makeshift memorial to George Floyd near the spot where he died while in custody of the Minneapolis police, on May 29, 2020 in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

Kerem Yucel | AFP | Getty Images



####
document number 6: 
G7 Summit 2019 – when is the meeting, where is it being hosted and which countries’ leaders are in France?


FRANCE is to host the 45th meeting of seven of the world's most advanced economies.

Here's what you need to know about the most powerful summit on Earth...


Canada will host the 44th meeting of the G7 leaders on June 8 - 9 Credit: EPA


What does the G7 do?


The Group of Seven (G7) is an informal grouping of seven of the world’s advanced economies, as well as the EU and European Commission.

They consist of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States and the presidency rotates every year.

It offers the leaders of these nations to come together and tackle the most challenging global issues of the time.

In the last 40 years, the G7 claims to have "strengthened security policy, mainstreamed climate change and supported disarmament programmes".

The group was previously known as the G8 and counted Russia among its members, but Russia has been excluded since annexing the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine in early 2014.

Where is G7 2019 being hosted?


This year, leaders will gather between August 24-26 in the city of Biarritz in southwestern France.

Talks will take place in a number of venues in the city, including the luxurious Hotel du Palais.

Security for the event is said to be "extremely heavy" and "unprecedented".

Biarritz's airport will be closed to the public from Thursday to Sunday, as will the train station and those of four neighbouring municipalities.

Commuter trains are also cancelled, and a section of a nearby motorway has been rerouted.

Those already in certain areas of the city will also face security cordons.

Which leaders will be at the summit in Canada?



Canadian Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau


French President, Emmanuel Macron


US President, Donald Trump


British Prime Minister, Boris Johnson


Italian Prime Minister, Giuseppe Conte


German Chancellor, Angela Merkel


Japanese Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe


President of the European Council, Donald Tusk



The following leaders have also been invited to attend the summit and participate in some sessions:


Australian Prime Minister, Scott Morrison


Indian Prime Minister, Narendra Modi


Spanish Prime Minister, Pedro Sanchez



What's on this year's agenda?


On the agenda for this year's summit will be the ongoing trade war between the United States and China, the European-backed nuclear deal with Iran currently opposed by President Trump, and the unrest that continues to unfold in Hong Kong.

The meeting will also be Boris Johnson first major appearance on the world stage since he became prime minister in July.

It will be seen as an opportunity to acquaint himself with world leaders ahead of the UK's EU exit and to discuss alternatives to the current exit deal with EU leaders.

Johnson is also expected to hold a bilateral meeting with President Trump to discuss the relationship between their two countries.

What criticisms have been made of the G7?


G7 gatherings tend to attract thousands of protesters.

In 2018, protest groups in Quebec focused on global trade, the environment, migration, aboriginal rights and a number of other issues.

A coalition organised "a mass demonstration against the G7, capitalism, patriarchy, colonialism, racism and borders".



Many protesters claim the G7 - which has no representative from any African, Russian or Middle Eastern nation - is completely outdated.

Protest groups also use the worldwide platform as a stage to lobby and campaign on issues that are important to them.

We pay for your stories!
Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team?
Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 .
You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502.
We pay for videos too.
Click here to upload yours.



####
document number 7: 
Riots in Greece : the best photos


The 2010–2012 Greek protests are a series of demonstrations and general strikes taking place across Greece.
The protests, which began on 5 May 2010, were sparked by plans to cut public spending and raise taxes asausterity measures in exchange for a €110 billion bail-out, aimed at solving the 2010–2011 Greek debt crisis.
Three people were killed in the 5 May protests, one of the largest in Greece since 1973.
On 25 May 2011, anti-austerity protestors organized by the Direct Democracy Now!
movement, known as theIndignant Citizens Movement, started demonstrating in major cities across Greece.
This second wave of demonstrations proved different from the years before in that they are not partisan and began through peaceful means.
Some of the protests later turned violent, particularly in the capital city of Athens.
Sparked by the 2011 Spanish Protests, these demonstrations were organized entirely using social networking sites, which earned it the nickname "May of Facebook".
The demonstrations and square sit-ins were officially ended when municipal police removed demonstrators from Thessaloniki's White Tower square on 7 August 2011.
On 29 June 2011, violent clashes occurred between the riot police and protesters as the Greek parliament voted to accept the EU's austerity requirements.
Accusations of police brutality were reported by international media such as the BBC, The Guardian, CNN iReport and the New York Times as well as Amnesty International.
The Athens Prosecutor agreed to an investigation into accusations of excessive use of tear gas, as well as the alleged use of other expired and carcinogenic chemical substances.
The investigation is currently under way.

Source : Wikipedia

All photography below are copyrighted by their authors – Click on photos to see each license.
Thumbnail photography is under CC Licence by Sotiris Farmakidis

#1


By Andreas Tsam

#2


By makisraf

#3


By Bamako Brad

#4


By mkhalili

#5


By Timos L

#6


By Iason Hatzitheodorou

#7


By Yiannis Kourtoglou

#8


By wisepig

#9


By alexandros_M

#10


By Noumenorian

comments



####
document number 8: 
Herbal Therapy


About


For centuries, Chinese herbs have been prescribed alongside acupuncture.
Both therapies have the rudimentary belief that there is an inherent relationship between humans, Mother Earth, and the universe.
Herbs may be prescribed in quite a few different configurations: capsules, ground powder in tea or soup, ointments.

When I started acupuncture back in May, my Acupuncturist prescribed me two different herbal blends of my own.
During my very first appointment, she walked me through my pain points, both physically and emotionally.
She took careful notes on my personal treatment goals, current medications, and health history.
I left her office with one bag of green powdered herbs and one bag of light brown powdered herbs.


Blog Post 9_Herbs


She instructed me to mix my daily dose of herbs with hot water and drink them like a shot.
When I added the water, the smell was pretty awful, but I persisted and took my "healthy shot"... And then I immediately threw up in my sink...
YES, it was really that bad!!
There was no way I was going to be able to

drink

my herbs.
My Acupuncturist recommended buying some empty capsules that were gluten free, BSE free, and harbored zero additives or preservatives.
She explained how easy it is to capsulize my herbs at home.
Even though this felt like a daunting project, I ordered the capsules and capsule plate from Amazon that evening.
Thank the Good Lord that Mike happened to be home the day my Amazon package arrived, because this was a difficult process the first time.
We read the instructions, watched about 612 YouTube videos (barely an exaggeration), and even had to break out the pen and paper for some math.
After about two hours, we had made close to one hundred capsules.


Post 9_Process Pic


As you can probably see from my pictures, there is a lot that goes into capsulizing your own herbs!
I decided to give the herbs one month-- If I did not feel a significant difference in how I felt, I was definitely not going to continue this time consuming process every single week.

"Often, people take herbal medicines for a physical response, but what they find is that the body also responds in an emotional way to the plant medicine that they're taking."

-Karen Rose

I started to notice a change in my apatite and energy levels by week three.
When I stopped taking Adderall in mid January, I gained almost twenty pounds, so I was super excited to one day realize that I wasn't starving ALL of the time anymore.
The increase in energy levels have been slow, but steady.
I'm on week five now and down almost ten pounds, which may be contributing to my increased energy.
I'm hopeful that the herbs will also have a calming affect on me, in the coming weeks.
My Acupuncturist is enthusiastic in her belief that Chinese herbs can help lower anxiety levels and facilitate an overall more peaceful feeling in some people.
Until then, I'm just super thankful for these herbs, as they have truly helped "normalize" my apatite and have given me a much needed boost.

I'm slowly starting to feel like me again, the one that I so vaguely remember... Better yet, I'm starting to feel like the person I always knew I could be...
The person who embodies inner peace, without constant anxiety and never quite feeling good enough.
For that, I'm so very grateful.

Please remember to protect your peace.

Jessica



####
document number 9: 
The petrol bomb’s incendiary – and uncertain – history


Incendiaries of varying complexity have been used in warfare since ancient times.


The petrol bomb – or "Molotov cocktail" – is an iconic symbol of 20th-century political violence.
Simple, cheap and effective, it has become a staple feature of protest, riot and rebellion; a weapon of choice for the discontented masses.
But what are its origins, and who can be credited with its invention?

This is a question with no simple answer.
Incendiaries of varying complexity have been used in warfare since ancient times.
Indeed, the use of fire as weapon is referenced among the earliest books of the Bible.
It should come as no surprise then, that the petrol bomb has many ancestors, with various earthenware incendiary projectiles recorded in use as early as the 9th century BC.

Looking to more recent times, it is clear that the petrol bomb also has more immediate forerunners in the 19th century.
At the very least, the basic concept was prefigured in the spectre of the Pétroleuses, an imaginary body of working-class women accused of starting the fires that devastated Paris in the final days of the commune in 1871.

Descriptions of these phantom arsonists typically spoke of bottles of petrol and burning rags being thrown through cellar windows.
For the most part, the fires had actually been started by the soldiers of the commune, using more traditional methods of arson.

Jes


Nevertheless, the petrol bomb as we know it today – a glass bottle or jar, filled with a simple incendiary mixture, and fixed with a basic fuse or wick to facilitate ignition upon breakage – is commonly believed to have originated during the Spanish Civil War (1936–39), where it was used by both nationalists and republicans as an anti-tank weapon.

Those early examples were crude and remarkably unstable.
As one English veteran of the International Brigade later commented: "At least 10% of those who try these nasty things are likely to burn themselves quite badly."

A more refined, mass-produced, version was subsequently developed by the Finnish Army for use against soviet tanks during the Winter War (1939–40).
Here, it attracted more widespread attention, and earned an almost mythical status in the narrative of Finland’s surprise victory over the Red Army.

This was also the conflict in which it gained the nickname "Molotov cocktail", a mocking reference to the then soviet foreign minister, Vyacheslav Molotov.

C-Monster


Thereafter, the concept quickly spread.
In 1940, the British started work on a version with a self-igniting mixture for use by the home guard.
In the 1950s, it was again employed against the Red Army by anti-communist resistance groups, most notably during the Hungarian Revolution (1956).
Since then, its frequent replication has seen it pass into the realm of common knowledge.

Yet this is not so much an origin story as a narrative of how the petrol bomb has become embedded in popular consciousness.
Indeed, it is clear that the device – in all its fundamental aspects – was in use much earlier than the Spanish Civil War.

A case in point is the Irish revolution (1916–23), where it may have been in use as early as May 1920.
That month, members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) used bottles of petrol and paraffin to set fire to a police barracks in Limerick.
But although some of those involved in the attack later likened their actions to the use of Molotov cocktails, this is somewhat misleading.

Leckey Road, Derry, Northern Ireland by Femke Soontiens.


There is little to suggest that these projectiles carried a fuse or wick.
Rather, they were used to spread accelerant across the roof.
This became a common tactic thereafter.

By 1922, there is irrefutable evidence of the use of petrol bombs by the IRA; this time along the newly created Irish border.
Contemporary documents reveal that local units – under the leadership of future Irish politician and international statesman Frank Aiken – had evolved their own form of the now familiar device, and were using it regularly in operations ranging from sectarian attacks on civilian homes to ambushes against the police and military.

It was especially valued for its ability to "make an oven of an armoured car" while avoiding the sort of civilian casualties that could result from the use of conventional explosives.

The novelty of the concept is clear from a painstaking third-party description of the device submitted to Aiken’s superior officers in September 1922:

It consists of a bottle containing a mixture – ½ petrol, ½ paraffin, surrounded by a rubber band which holds in place a piece of fuse (4 sec) at either end of which is a safety match head.
One end of the fuse is lighted and by the time the bottle strikes the objective the other end ignites causing the mixture to go on fire.


Riot police dodge petrol bombs thrown by protesters outside the Greek Parliament during a demonstration in central Athens, Greece, March 2010.


Although improvised incendiaries were nothing new to the IRA, their past efforts had tended to be more sophisticated, employing complex chemical mixtures and intricate hand-grenade constructions.

Whereas the contrasting simplicity of Aiken’s petrol bomb should have made it an asset, in reality it only served to marginalise it.
His superiors simply did not understand the device:

I doubt that it will have such an effect on an armoured car.
What is to prevent the bottle breaking before the mixture takes fire?


Consequently, there were no attempts to encourage its use beyond Aiken’s unit, and it quickly fell from memory when the conflict ended in 1923.

This surely is only one of many largely forgotten episodes in the history of the petrol bomb.
And therein lies the difficulty of the question posed at the outset of this article.

Something so simple has undoubtedly been "invented" many times over.

Over the coming months, we’ll be running pieces looking at the history and nature of violence.



####
document number 10: 
Police Surveilled George Floyd Protests With Help From Twitter-Affiliated Startup Dataminr



Leveraging close ties

to Twitter, controversial artificial intelligence startup Dataminr helped law enforcement digitally monitor the protests that swept the country following the killing of George Floyd, tipping off police to social media posts with the latest whereabouts and actions of demonstrators, according to documents reviewed by The Intercept and a source with direct knowledge of the matter.

The monitoring seems at odds with claims from both Twitter and Dataminr that neither company would engage in or facilitate domestic surveillance following a string of 2016 controversies.
Twitter, up until recently a longtime investor in Dataminr alongside the CIA, provides the company with full access to a content stream known as the "firehose" — a rare privilege among tech firms and one that lets Dataminr, recently valued at over $1.8 billion, scan every public tweet as soon as its author hits send.
Both companies denied that the protest monitoring meets the definition of surveillance.

A History of Police Work


Dataminr helps newsrooms, corporations, and governments around the world track crises with superhuman speed as they unfold across social media and the wider web.
Through a combination of people and software, the company alerts organizations to chatter around global crises — wars, shootings, riots, disasters, and so forth — so that they’ll have a competitive edge as news is breaking.
But the meaning of that competitive edge, the supercharged ability to filter out important events from the noise of hundreds of millions of tweets and posts across social media, will vary drastically based on the customer; the agenda of a newspaper using Dataminr to inform its breaking news coverage won’t be the same as the agendas of a bank or the FBI.
It’s this latter category of Dataminr’s business, lucrative government work, that’s had the firm on the defensive in recent years.

In 2016, Twitter was forced to reckon with multiple reports that its platform was being used to enable domestic surveillance, including a Wall Street Journal report on Dataminr’s collaboration with American spy agencies in May; an American Civil Liberties Union report on Geofeedia, a Dataminr competitor, in October; and another ACLU investigation into Dataminr’s federal police surveillance work in December.
The company sought to assure the public that attempts to monitor its users for purposes of surveillance were strictly forbidden under its rules, and that any violators would be kicked off the platform.
For example, then-VP Chris Moody wrote in a company blog post that "using Twitter’s Public APIs or data products to track or profile protesters and activists is absolutely unacceptable and prohibited."
In a letter to the ACLU, Twitter public policy chief Colin Crowell similarly wrote that "the use of Twitter data for surveillance is strictly prohibited" and that "Datatminr’s product does not provide any government customers with … any form of surveillance."

Twitter also said that Dataminr, one of its "official partners," would "no longer support direct access by fusion centers" to information such as tweet locations; fusion centers are controversial facilities dedicated to sharing intelligence between the federal government and local police.
Dataminr at the same time announced it would no longer provide a product for conducting geospatial analysis "to those supporting first reponse" and added that such clients did not have "direct firehose access."

But based on interviews, public records requests, and company documents reviewed by The Intercept, Dataminr continues to enable what is essentially surveillance by U.S. law enforcement entities, contradicting its earlier assurances to the contrary, even if it remains within some of the narrow technical boundaries it outlined four years ago, like not providing direct firehose access, tweet geolocations, or certain access to fusion centers.

Dataminr relayed tweets and other social media content about the George Floyd and Black Lives Matter protests directly to police, apparently across the country.
In so doing, it used to great effect its privileged access to Twitter data — despite current terms of service that explicitly bar software developers "from tracking, alerting, or monitoring sensitive events (such as protests, rallies, or community organizing meetings)" via Twitter.

And despite Dataminr’s claims that its law enforcement service merely "delivers breaking news alerts on emergency events, such as natural disasters, fires, explosions and shootings," as a company spokesperson told The Intercept for a previous report, the company has facilitated the surveillance of recent protests, including nonviolent activity, siphoning vast amounts of social media data from across the web and converting it into tidy police intelligence packages.

Keeping an Eye on Peaceful Protests


Dataminr’s Black Lives Matter protest surveillance included persistent monitoring of social media to tip off police to the locations and activities of protests, developments within specific rallies, as well as instances of alleged "looting" and other property damage.
According to the source with direct knowledge of Dataminr’s protest monitoring, the company and Twitter’s past claims that they don’t condone or enable surveillance are "bullshit," relying on a deliberately narrowed definition.
"It’s true Dataminr doesn’t specifically track protesters and activists individually, but at the request of the police they are tracking protests, and therefore protesters," this source explained.

According to internal materials reviewed by The Intercept, Dataminr meticulously tracked not only ongoing protests, but kept comprehensive records of upcoming anti-police violence rallies in cities across the country to help its staff organize their monitoring efforts, including events’ expected time and starting location within those cities.
A protest schedule seen by The Intercept shows Dataminr was explicitly surveilling dozens of protests big and small, from Detroit and Brooklyn to York, Pennsylvania, and Hampton Roads, Virginia.

Company documents also show the firm instructed members of its staff to look for instances of "lethal force used against protesters by police or vice-versa," "property damage," "widespread arson or looting against government or commercial infrastructure," "new instances of officer-involved shootings or death with potential interpretation of racial bias," and occasions when a "violent protests spreads to new major American city."
Staff were also specifically monitoring social media for posts about "Officers involved in Floyd’s death" — all of which would be forwarded to Dataminr’s governmental customers through a service named "First Alert."


The Dataminr documents on protest monitoring seen by The Intercept do not specify if they are used for news clients, police clients, or both.
But a Dataminr document from October 2019 listed within the company’s "law enforcement footprint" the New York Police Department, Los Angeles Police Department, Chicago Police Department, and Louisiana State Police.
The LAPD told The Intercept it conducted a trial of Dataminr but chose not to enter a contract and did not use the system in connection with BLM protests.
The Louisiana State Police declined to comment, citing a state secrecy law.
NYPD did not comment and CPD could not be reached for comment.
In January 2019, a New York court ordered the NYPD to turn over records about its use of Dataminr resulting from a New York Civil Liberties Union lawsuit over alleged surveillance of Black Lives Matter activists.

"Dataminr is providing information for local police, including [many] metropolitan police departments in cities facing protests," the source said.
"They are some of Dataminr’s biggest clients and they set the agenda."
Dataminr spokesperson Kerry McGee declined to comment on the company’s clientele.

And Dataminr alert emails sent to the Minneapolis Police Department, obtained via a public records request, show the company collected, bundled, and captioned Twitter content relevant to the anti-police brutality protests and forwarded it directly to police as these events unfolded, including information on apparently nonviolent protests.
The emails show Dataminr relaying the locations and images of Black Lives Matter protesters in the city where George Floyd lived and was killed, and where the nationwide wave of outrage against police abuse was launched, a fact difficult to square with the company’s claim that it doesn’t provide its governmental customers with "any form of surveillance."
The location information in the alerts underline that while Dataminr may not technically have direct access to the geolocational data attached to many tweets by Twitter, the texts and images of the tweets relayed to the police often contain overt geographical references, or have such references added manually by Dataminr staff.

While some of the alerts are sourced from the tweets of local and national news reporters, many are attributed to the accounts of ordinary bystanders — what the system calls "eyewitnesses" — who were either watching or attending the rallies and tweeting in a completely personal capacity.
In one First Alert message relayed to the MPD on May 31, six days after Floyd’s murder, Dataminr alerted police to a tweet reading "peaceful protest outside US Bank Stadium in downtown Minneapolis.
End racism.
End police brutality.
End inequality and inequities.
#JusticeForFloyd #Minneapolisprotest #BlackLivesMatters," along with a photo snapped by the tweeter.
The accompanying caption, provided by Dataminr’s human staff, specified that this group of protesters had been "seen at US Bank Stadium on 400 block of Chicago Avenue."
Another First Alert notification sent to the MPD three days prior tipped off police to this supposed public safety threat: "Protesters seen sitting on street in front of security officers in Oakdale, MN."
Another monitored tweet and accompanying photo relayed to MPD by Dataminr reads, simply, "Peaceful protest at Lake Lyndale."

A tweet and photo relayed to Minneapolis police reads, simply, "Peaceful protest at Lake Lyndale."


First Alert also scans other popular platforms like Snapchat and Facebook, the latter being particularly useful for protest organizers trying to rapidly mobilize their communities.
On at least one occasion, according to MPD records, Dataminr was able to point police to a protest’s Facebook event page before it had begun.

Some of Dataminr’s alerts passed along dubious information.
For example, on May 28, the company passed along a discredited claim about billionaire philanthropist George Soros, informing the MPD that "Commentator Candace Owens claims Minneapolis, MN chief of police says many protesters are not from the city and claims investor George Soros is funding protesters through Open Society Foundation."

Surveillance as a Public Service


This apparently glaring contradiction by Dataminr, still publicly claiming it would never engage in surveillance while simultaneously facilitating the surveillance of protests, hasn’t been lost on the company’s staff.
At a virtual staff meeting in June, a recording of which was obtained by The Intercept, a Dataminr manager attempted to explain why the company’s persistent monitoring of First Amendment activity on behalf of the police was not, in fact, surveillance.
The manager, identified by the source as executive vice president Jason Wilcox, granted that there were likely Dataminr staff pondering some difficult questions: "How does our technology, how does our company, how does our platform, play in these types of unfolding events that are out there?"
— an allusion to the nationwide protests that were by then in their heady first week.
"We sell to law enforcement.
What does that mean?"
Wilcox’s defense of Dataminr was based mostly on a sort of linguistic distinction: that relaying data to the police isn’t a form of surveillance, but a form of ideologically neutral newsgathering.
In an alternate euphemism, Wilcox described the surveillance alerts forwarded to police as "situational awareness through real time events, [in] many of which people’s lives are at stake, and they can respond more quickly and save lives."

This is generally the same reason Twitter and Dataminr’s PR teams describe this governmental product as a source of "news alerts," not intelligence — a rationale that largely obscures the major differences between what, say, a newspaper might do with rapidly updated information about a protest against policing versus what the police might want to do with that same data.

Do you have a story about social media monitoring you’d like to share?
Contact the author on Signal at +1 978 261 7389, via email at sam.biddle@theintercept.com, or through one of these secure channels.

Wilcox added that Dataminr’s protest surveillance, far from presenting any chilling effect on political expression or free assembly, was a force of progressivism and reform: "We alert on events where members of law enforcement overstep their bounds," Wilcox claimed.
"We found abuse of power.
… Ultimately what we’re doing is we’re providing a check and balance for [police].
… Those alerts provide context to the world keeping people safe, and enabling people to do so in a way that isn’t about trying to invade user privacy, but quite the opposite.
It helps magnify their voice."

Asked about the comments, Dataminr’s McGee wrote, "Dataminr does not comment on internal company meetings."
Wilcox did not respond to a request for comment.

Wilcox also defended Dataminr’s work with police by emphasizing the firm’s close ties to Twitter, the great firehose benefactor, which, according to Wilcox, "is often one of the first social media platforms to reach out and protect privacy, they seem to be most attuned to it, they’re very concerned with ensuring that their platform is not misused."

Dataminr’s internal justification of its work for police also rested in part on the argument that it’s not as nefarious as it could be: "We look at lots of different companies leveraging social media, and they have often, not everyone, but often, a very different set of goals," Wilcox explained.
"Their goal is to help with surveillance.
They build users graphs, they track users as they go across different social media platforms, they follow what a person says over time.
And we do not do that."
Wilcox named a few other mechanisms he said showed how he’d "worked hard to ensure that our technology cannot be casually misused here," namely built-in limits on what keywords police can use to tailor their "news alerts."

But according to the source with direct knowledge of Dataminr’s protest monitoring, this is misleading: There’s nothing built into First Alert that would prevent police from filtering or manually searching the intelligence they receive from Dataminr for specific terms, such as "#BLM" or "antifa."
Once a protest tweet is run through Dataminr’s system and spit out the other end into a police department’s inboxes, in other words, Dataminr loses control over how the information is used.
This image of technological restraint also differs considerably from the pitch Dataminr gives police.
An apparent 2019 Dataminr slide deck from a company presentation to the FBI, included in a recent online data dump known as "BlueLeaks," stated that "Dataminr’s mission is to integrate all publicly available data signals to create the dominant information discovery platform," and touted a client’s ability to customize "user-defined criteria" for alerts like "topic selection" and "geographic filters."
The end goal: "Reduce the time between an event and client action."

Surveillance or "News Alerts"?


When asked about Dataminr’s work with law enforcement as outlined above, both Twitter and Dataminr adopted a similar defense: This isn’t surveillance because we have a policy against surveillance, which therefore means we don’t engage in surveillance.
Neither firm would comment or discuss how exactly the above does not meet the definition of surveillance, nor would they provide the institutional definitions of such as defined by either company.

"We see a societal benefit in public Twitter data being used for news alerting, first responder support, and disaster relief," said Twitter spokesperson Lindsay McCallum, who added that Dataminr’s First Alert tool "is in compliance with our developer policy" banning surveillance.
"First Alert is not permitted to be used for surveillance of any kind by First Alert users," Dataminr’s McGee told The Intercept.
In response to a screenshot copy of the tweet Dataminr forwarded to Minneapolis police regarding the exact location of a group of protesters, McGee claimed that this was flagged for the department because it showed traffic problems, not protesters.
"Alerts on an intersection being blocked are news alerts, not monitoring protests or surveillance," said McGee.
"A local news organization would also cover major intersections being blocked as a news story — this is not surveillance."

But to some surveillance scholars, legal experts, and activists, there’s little doubt about what Dataminr is up to, and what Twitter is enabling, no matter what careful terminology they use.
According to Brandi Collins-Dexter, a campaign director with the civil rights group Color of Change, Dataminr’s practices are an example of "if it walks like a duck and talks like a duck," with regards to surveillance.
"We know that law enforcement agencies spend a breathtaking amount of money to aggressively track, target, and surveil Black communities," said Collins-Dexter.
"Twitter can’t have it both ways, courting Black activists and marketing themselves as the pre-eminent tool for organizing against injustice, while turning a blind eye to the number of companies that are contracting with them for the clear intent of surveillance."

"Twitter can’t have it both ways, courting Black activists and marketing themselves as the pre-eminent tool for organizing against injustice, while turning a blind eye to companies that are contracting with them for the clear intent of surveillance."


Steven Renderos, the executive director of civil rights group MediaJustice, echoed this sentiment.
"It’s troubling that that Dataminr is providing services to police and it’s flawed logic to think there’s no harm in turning over Twitter posts to cops," said Renderos.
"The police have a history of using social media to track Black activists.
Dataminr’s practices is just the latest example of how tech companies are fueling racist policing in the United States."

"If Dataminr is sharing posts about demonstrations and protesters with police, that would be incredibly concerning and it would be difficult to understand how that practice doesn’t facilitate police surveillance in violation of Twitter’s own policies," said Matt Cagle, an attorney with the ACLU of Northern California.
"Social networks like Twitter need to protect users and ensure that developers are not sharing their First Amendment expression with law enforcement agencies, a practice that potentially exposes people — particularly Black, Indigenous, and people of color — to further surveillance and state violence."

Andrew Ferguson, a visiting law professor at American University, rejected the companies’ contention that because Dataminr only ingests public tweets, the system is only capable of news gathering — as if police snapping pictures of demonstrators would be better understood as photojournalism, not photo surveillance.
"Monitoring activities and forwarding information to police is clearly surveillance," explained Ferguson, author of "The Rise of Big Data Policing: Surveillance, Race, and the Future of Law Enforcement."
"If the police were a data-based advertising company we would say this was consumer surveillance.
If the police were tracking protestors directly we would call it government surveillance.
A forwarding of the same information and calling it ‘news’ is still surveillance."

Whether Twitter’s hundreds of millions of users will buy the argument that automatically relaying tweets to the police is mere innocent newsgathering remains an open question, but for most of them a moot one: Outside of laborious public records requests, it’s hard to imagine how someone could learn if their protest tweets were swallowed into the algorithms by a government contractor.
Or, one could think of it the way Jason Wilcox urged his staff: "All those voices, where we get to amplify that for everybody.
… It’s pretty impressive.
It’s an amazing event."


Additional Credits:



####
document number 11: 
Bahrain, Qatar, and the Hawar Islands: Resolution of a Gulf Territorial Dispute


Article excerpt


The Hawar Islands dispute, resolved in 2001, is the only territorial dispute between two Arab states that has been resolved by the International Court of Justice (ICJ).
Several factors played a role in influencing Qatar and Bahrain to resolve their dispute at the ICJ: 1) the inability of Arab states and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to mediate the dispute, 2) incentives for significant oil and natural gas reserves, and 3) incentives for bilateral and regional cooperation on salient issues between the two states.
Both states have benefited significantly since the resolution of the dispute.

For 65 years, from 1936-2001, Qatar and Bahrain disputed sovereignty of the Hawar Islands, the fashts (shoals) of al-Dibal and al-Jaradah, territorial waters of the Persian Gulf, and Zubarah, a district on the Qatari peninsula.
The territorial dispute was peacefully resolved when the International Court of Justice (ICJ) announced a final and binding ruling on the case on March 16, 2001.1 The case had been the longest, most protracted, and most complex case ever brought to the Court.2 The ruling awarded Bahrain with the Hawar Islands and al-Jaradah and rewarded Qatar with Zubarah, the Janan Islands, and al-Dibal.
The division of disputed territory involved each state receiving approximately half of the islands and shoals.
Both Qatar and Bahrain accepted the ruling so that the dispute was settled in finality, and both states immediately began exploitation of oil and natural gas resources.
The case was expected to receive much scrutiny from other states in the region involved in territorial disputes, making it a significant case.3

The Hawar Islands dispute is the only territorial dispute between two Arab states that has been brought to and successfully resolved by the ICJ.4 Typically, Arab states have avoided international institutions using universal international law.
Rather, they have historically used non-binding third party resolution mechanisms, particularly me- diation by another Arab state or regional organization to settle conflicts.
These states have preferred to appoint a third party mediator who will be able to act as "an unbiased insider" with strong connections to the Arab community.
In a study of territorial dispute resolution in the latter part of the 20th century, 78% of states with legal codes based on or influenced by Islamic law submitted their disputes to an Islamic third party for resolution.
Typical mediators have included presidents, kings, or envoys from Egypt, Syria, Kuwait, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, as well as mediation by the Arab League, the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).
This unique feature of dispute resolution among Arab states makes it all the more puzzling that Qatar and Bahrain would be willing to turn to an outside international institution based primarily on civil law, to resolve their territorial dispute.

This article attempts to explain the reasons why Qatar and Bahrain were willing to adjudicate the dispute at the ICJ, accept the ruling, and most importantly, enforce the findings of the court.
I argue that three primary factors promoted resolution of the dispute using the ICJ as a resolution method: 1) the inability of other regional states and the GCC to mediate the dispute, 2) incentives for significant oil and natural gas reserves, and 3) incentives for bilateral and regional cooperation on salient issues between the two states.
Not only did the ongoing territorial dispute prevent secure access for each state to what was expected to be significant oil and gas resources, but both states came to realize that, without resolution of the territorial dispute, they could not benefit from cooperation on several other salient issues, both bilateral and regional.
It is these combined incentives that motivated Bahrain and Qatar to turn the dispute over to the ICJ for a final and peaceful resolution after their inability to resolve the dispute through previous bilateral negotiations and mediation attempts.
…



####
document number 12: 
Dr. Imani Walker Shares the Latest on Her Divorce


This season of

Married to Medicine Los Angeles

was one of change for Dr. Imani Walker.
The psychiatrist began the season adjusting to living apart from her husband, Phil Johnson, as he worked on launching a cannabis dispensary business in Oklahoma.

But as the season went on, it seemed as though there was more going on in Dr. Imani's marriage than she was letting on.
Dr. Imani later revealed, first to Dr. Britten Cole and then to the rest of the group, that she and her husband had decided to separate and get a divorce.

Dr. Imani shared the more current status of her divorce during an interview over the phone with

The Daily Dish

on June 17, confirming that she and Phil had, in fact, moved forward with the divorce since filming this season of

Married to Medicine Los Angeles

.
"I filed first, and then Phil had acknowledged that he received it.
So, I’m using a mediator right now because it’s just an easier process and it’s not as dramatic," she explained.
"So right now, we’re separated, and our divorce is pending.
So, we’re just kind of waiting for all the paperwork and all that stuff to go through so that we can sign off on it."

Though she and Phil have gotten into some arguments throughout the divorce, Dr. Imani said that things have been peaceful for the most part throughout the process.
"The last time that we spoke, it was just like, you know what, I’ve come to terms with it, you’ve come to terms with it.
He has two children who are older than my son that I still am in communication with," Dr. Imani said.
"So even though our relationship didn’t work out, we’re still cordial toward each other.
I can’t be mad at him because I’m happier now.
That’s just what I had to do.
I just had to end it."

Dr. Imani's son Idris is from a previous relationship, but she has said that Phil has been a father figure to her 11-year-old for the majority of his life.
Idris is handling the divorce well, according to Dr. Imani.
"Idris is great.
I mean, even when we told him, he was kind of like, 'Oh, OK.'
And it took him like a day or so to kind of let it sink in," Dr. Imani said.
"But then after that, he was fine, and I think a lot of that is because he sees that I’m happier now, too."

During a separate interview with

The Daily Dish

podcast, Dr. Imani admitted that she "definitely dreaded" having to tell Idris that she and Phil were getting a divorce, especially since she knows how difficult it is to go through something like that after her own parents ended their marriage.
"But with Idris, it went a lot better than I thought.
He was just like, 'OK, I hear you guys.
It’s all good,'" Dr. Imani recalled.
"I continue to talk to him about it.
But I think now he’s like, 'You know what, it’s fine.
You’re still here.'
He’s like, 'My mom is still here, so I’m OK.'"

Dr. Imani said that she believes Idris and Phil last spoke a couple of months ago, but they haven't talked since then.
"So I’m kind of putting the onus on Phil to really reach out and talk to Idris and just see how he’s doing," she said.

When it comes to what's next for her love life, Dr. Imani said that dating is "not really something that I’ve thought about seriously."
"I have to decide when I’m ready," she told The Daily Dish.
"I’m not really thinking about that too hard right now.
I’m just kind of dealing with the day-to-day."

However, she is open to the possibility of getting married again one day.
"I think if I found the right person who was able to just accept me for me and is very supportive, I’m not averse to it," Dr. Imani shared.
"I just have to basically give myself some time."

The

Married to Medicine Los Angeles

cast had some ideas about the future of Dr. Imani's love life in the Season 2 finale.
Check it out, below.



####
document number 13: 
March For Our Lives: The children shall lead us



BOSTON GLOBE Petrina Chan took part in the March For Our Lives rally in Boston.



THE MARCH FOR OUR LIVES demonstrations and rallies occurred throughout the U.S. and in cities around the globe Sunday inspired by a gunman's rampage through Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida that took 17 lives.


Sen.
Kamala Harris joined the students in the March For Our Lives.



"The students from Stoneman Douglas have turned their mourning into a movement — and I genuinely believe they have changed the conversation about gun violence in America," said California Sen.
Kamala Harris.

"From here, we need to look to our youth for inspiration.
They are teaching all of us so many lessons on activism and action in the face of tragedy.
I wish Congressional leaders had their courage and determination to stand up to the gun lobby," said Harris, whose parents come from India and the Caribbean.

According to its website, March For Our Lives is created by, inspired by, and led by students across the country who will no longer risk their lives waiting for someone else to take action to stop the epidemic of mass school shootings that has become all too familiar.
In the tragic wake of the seventeen lives brutally cut short in Florida, politicians are telling us that now is not the time to talk about guns.
March For Our Lives believes the time is now.


A half-century after Bob Dylan's iconic "The Times They Are A-Changin" inspired a generation of young people to march against the Vietnam War, for civil rights and question anybody over 30.
the 60's anthem gained new meaning to the Baby Boomers' grandchildlren, young students who took part in the March for Our Lives Sunday (Mar.
24).
With the opening stanza, "Come gather now children wherever you are," the song was a perfect message to the young kids taking part in the gun-control demonstration.
Sung by Jennifer Hudson, whose mother, brother and seven-year-old nephew were all shot dead in 2008,, the performnce was an emotional highlight to a day full of powerful moments.
Parkland student Emma Gonzalez created a powerful statement with her silence at the Washington D.C. march.


"Six minutes and about 20 seconds," Emma said, tears flowing down her cheeks.
"In a little over 6 minutes, 17 of our friends were taken from us, 15 were injured and everyone in the Douglas community was forever altered."

So young, yet so meaninful speeches were given throughout thet day: Parkland student David Hogg: "We are going to make this the voting issue.
We are going to take this to every election, to every state and every city.
When politicians send their thoughts and prayers with no action, we say, ‘No more.’
And to those politicians supported by the NRA, that allow the continued slaughter of our children and our future, I say get your resumes ready."

Fellow student Cameron Kasky read aloud the names of victims of the shooting, " We hereby promise to fix the broken system we’ve been forced into and create a better world for the generations to come.
Don’t worry, we’ve got this," Kasky said.

Martin Luther King's 9-year old granddaughter Yolanda King recalled her grandfather's famous "I Have A Dream" speech: "My grandfather had a dream that his four little children will not be judged by the color of the skin, but the content of their character.
I have a dream that enough is enough."

"I am here today to acknowledge and represent the African-American girls whose stories don’t make the front page of every national newspaper.
These stories don’t lead on the evening news," said 11-year old Naomi Wadler at the Washington D.C.
march.
"My school will now always be remembered for what took place on Feb.
14, 2018," said Leslie Chiu, a graduate of Stoneman Douglas who attends Northeastern University in Boston.

Her alma mater will be known, Chiu said, as the place that "started the movement that we are a part of today."

"Our generation will carry with us the weight and burden of countless lives lost and we will take it upon ourselves to ensure that on their behalf that we are the last ones in this environment of daily shootings," she said.

The Parkland students led the organizing but were soon joined by hundreds of incredible students across the country.


MIRASHAYE BASA



One of them is Mirashaye Basa, 18 of southern Indiana.
"I started becoming more politically aware after the 2016 presidential election.
So many of the tragedies that we see in the news and on social media are becoming normalized, and that is not acceptable.
There needs to be action.
My good friend Eli and I are very passionate about music and theatre, so we decided to contribute to the March for Our Lives movement by using our talents to make a video that calls attention to those who have been affected by gun violence.

"We proposed the idea at a March for Our Lives meeting and posted it on social media to help raise awareness," she said.

"As a high school student, sometimes it’s hard to find ways to make an impact on a large scale, but this movement has made me feel like anything is possible.
The students in Parkland are so inspiring; they’ve used and continue to use their voices effectively.
I hope the leaders of the country are influenced by the masses of people who demand action instead of the money they receive from interest groups.

"In the future, I hope we have gun control so effective that we never have a mass shooting ever again."


MADISON PHAN



One of the biggest turnouts for the march was held in Los Angeles.
One of the amazing student organizers was Madison "Madi" Phan., a jurnior at North Torrance Hhigh School.
Interviewed by Smart Girls, we learn that Madi has given a TED talk to kids in her district, been a member of ASB, and was a Girl Scout for six years.
Currently, Madi is involved in her school’s theatre and dance program, on the student panel group, and is in GATE progr In the future, Madi wants to be part of the film industry to give Asians and Asian-Americans more representation in Hollywood.
She would also like to provide assistance to those in developing countries.
Helping to make a change in society and the world is something Madi is passionate about and hopes for more amazing opportunities like participating in the March For Our Lives.

"Gun violence is something that impacts us all, whether directly or indirectly," said Rhiannon Rasaretnam, a Seattle March For Our Lives organizer told the

Seattle Times

.
"This is about us stepping up and not waiting for adults to take action on issues that risk our lives every single day."
_____________________________________________________________________________



####
document number 14: 
Violent Protests Continue In Minneapolis Over George Floyd's Death


NPR's Rachel Martin talks to Holly Bailey of

The Washington Post

about protesters in Minneapolis who have taken to the streets for a second night after a black man died in police custody.

RACHEL MARTIN, HOST:

Thousands in Minneapolis made their anger and their fury clear last night over the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody.

(SOUNDBITE OF GUN FIRING)

MARTIN: That's sound from video from CNN.
There, you can hear police firing tear gas at protesters.
It was the second night of protests.
And these demonstrations turned deadly when one man was shot to death.
Protesters there are seeking justice after video circulated of a white police officer with his knee on George Floyd's neck.
Floyd gasps for air, and then he dies.
Holly Bailey is with The Washington Post.
And she is on the ground there in Minneapolis.
Holly, thanks for being with us.

HOLLY BAILEY: Good morning.

MARTIN: You were out there on the streets last night.
Protests had been, actually, going on all day.
Can you describe what you saw?

BAILEY: Well, for most of the day, the protest had been peaceful.
There've been several hundred people outside the 3rd Precinct - the 3rd Police Precinct in south Minneapolis, a little bit south of downtown.
And then suddenly, the protests grew larger.
Several thousand people showed up.
Police were in riot gear.
Some were positioned on top of the police building firing tear gas and rubber bullets at the crowd to control it.
And meanwhile, the neighborhood around the police station basically dissolved into chaos.

There's several Target store - a Target store and other retail stores that - where windows were broken out and looting began.
By 10 o'clock last night, there were businesses on fire.
And the protest had extended sort of out of that neighborhood.
And I think there's a lot of people here fearing that this is just going to get worse.

MARTIN: I understand some of the protesters actually went to the home of one of the officers involved, is that right?

BAILEY: Yeah, Derek Chauvin, who is the officer pictured in the video with his knee on George Floyd's neck.
There are - protesters went to his home in a suburb of Minneapolis, several hundred people.
They poured red paint on his driveway.
Someone wrote killer on the garage door.
And there were also protests outside the home of the county prosecutor here as they - people demand for this officer to be arrested.

MARTIN: What more can you tell us about the four officers who were fired?

BAILEY: What we know is that, you know, Derek Chauvin and another officer, at least, had a history of being involved in altercations.
Chauvin had been involved in at least two police-involved shootings.
And, you know, there's a lot more that, you know, people are looking into at this point.
We only received the names of the latter two officers yesterday.
And so there's a lot more.
But they appear to be - they don't have as long of a time on the force as Chauvin did.
But I expect we're going to be hearing more about that in coming days.

MARTIN: So the mayor of Minneapolis, Jacob Frey, has been calling out for these officers to be arrested and charged, at least the primary officer involved.
What - is that going to happen?
I mean, do we have any indication at this point if charges are coming?

BAILEY: Well, yesterday, state officials, who are also having - running their own separate investigation, sort of said that they wanted to see action - whatever action happened very quickly.
One of the state officials compared it to the Eric Garner case, saying, you know, this is not - they're going to act more swiftly than New York did on this.
But, you know, a lot still has to happen in terms of the investigation.
There still hasn't been a medical examiner investigation of George Floyd's body that needs to happen.
And so just - there's a lot more that needs to happen before anybody is arrested.

MARTIN: All right.
Holly Bailey with The Washington Post reporting from Minneapolis.
Thanks very much.

BAILEY: Thank you.

Copyright © 2020 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 15: 
GUILTY LA - Shannon Richardson for sending ricin-laced letters, Shreveport, 2013



http://www.shreveporttimes.com/arti...Shreveport-postmarked-letters-contained-ricin

Both were mailed to New York mayor and referenced "the debate on gun laws."

Two anonymous, threatening letters postmarked in Shreveport and sent to New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and his gun control organization contained the deadly poison ricin, police said today.
Both missives referenced "the debate on gun laws" and contained a suspicious "pink-orange oily substance," said Paul Browne, the chief NYPD spokesman............
Both letters were mailed May 20 from Shreveport, law enforcement sources told NBC News.
More at link......




Figures.
I live in Shreveport and based on the kinds of comments I hear daily, I have complete faith in the nefarious intent of the residents to do great harm to people they do not agree with.
So proud.
Not.





FrayedKnot said: ↑

Figures.
I live in Shreveport and based on the kinds of comments I hear daily, I have complete faith in the nefarious intent of the residents to do great harm to people they do not agree with.
So proud.
Not.
Being that my late husband was a retired City of Shreveport police officer, I take exception to not being proud of the city.
People there are no different than in any other relatively large city.
It is not the fault of the many truly good citizens that a nut either from there or even someone passing through may be responsible for that letter being mailed with that postmark.
I suspect it was someone passing through - just my own personal opinion.
MOO





FrayedKnot said: ↑

Figures.
I live in Shreveport and based on the kinds of comments I hear daily, I have complete faith in the nefarious intent of the residents to do great harm to people they do not agree with.
So proud.
Not.
There are crazy people everywhere.
Not just Shreveport, LA.
I still think Louisiana is the greatest state in the nation.
I am proud of my state.
And always will be.
It's not defined by the actions of one.
JMO




"A letter addressed to President Barack Obama contained threats similar to those found in mail sent to New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, and is being tested for ricin, NBC 4 New York reports."
And, it has tested positive for ricin.
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/30/obama-ricin-letter_n_3360018.html https://mobile.twitter.com/eyewitnessnyc/status/340131484360916992 BREAKING NEWS: Law enforcement sources tell ABC News that a third letter addressed to President Obama has tested positive for ricin.




On the Obama letter (before the ricin was verified): http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/31/n...hreats-to-bloomberg-authorities-say.html?_r=0 Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly told reporters on Thursday that he believed all three letters were the same.
They are addressed from the envelope but not on the letter itself, Mr.
Kelly said.
In the letter it says you and then starts off with the narrative.
The letter in essence complains about gun control and says that anyone who comes for my guns will be shot in the face.




FBI: Ricin letter to Obama sent from Wash.
http://www.wbay.com/story/22463244/fbi-ricin-letter-to-obama-also-sent-from-wash SEATTLE (AP) - A suspicious letter containing the deadly poison ricin was mailed to President Barack Obama from Spokane, Wash., on the same day similar ricin-tainted letters were mailed to a federal judge and a post office, the FBI said Thursday.
A man arrested last week in Spokane has been charged with sending the letter to the Spokane-based judge after that letter and the letter to the post office were intercepted May 14.
The Obama letter was intercepted May 22, along with a similar letter sent to Fairchild Air Force Base, near Spokane, the Seattle FBI office said in a written statement...........more......




Where are people getting ricin?
Isn't that pretty impossible to come by?




Texas Army veteran quizzed over poison letters sent to Obama and Bloomberg after his wife 'finds ricin in their FRIDGE' "A Texas Army veteran is being questioned in connection with poison letters sent to President Obama and New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg after his wife found a container in their refrigerator filled with what appeared to be ricin.
The man, who neighbors identified to KSLA as father-of-five Nathaniel Richardson, is a civilian employee of the Department of Defense who works at the Red River Army Depot.
Sources said he is being treated as a person of interest.
His wife told officers that as well as the container in the fridge, she also found internet searches related to ricin production, Obama and Bloomberg on their computer."
Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/art...-President-Obama-Bloomberg.html#ixzz2Usqr0kfO I haven't followed through yet with the other links within the article, but this is a good start.




FBI raids New Boston, TX home in ricin letter case

KSLA TV Posted: May 30, 2013 7:00 PM PDT Updated: May 31, 2013 4:10 AM PDT By Willard Woods "A New Boston man is being questioned by the FBI and items have been taken from his home in connection with the investigation into ricin-laced letters sent to President Barack Obama, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, and the gun control lobbying group Mayors Against Illegal Guns.
Agents could be seen late Thursday night removing items from the South Maple Street home of a man identified by neighbors as Nathaniel Richardson.
Neighbors told KSLA News 12's Fred Gamble that he is an Army Veteran who works at the Red River Army Depot.
Both Richardson and his wife were questioned at their New Boston home, where they live with their five children.
Initial reports stated that Richardson had been questioned at his workplace and later at his home.
Gamble reported that the wife had been in the back seat of a law enforcement unit before being returned to the house."
More... http://www.ksla.com/story/22463360/authorities-inside-new-boston




"The man lives roughly 100 miles from the Shreveport, La.
mail hub that sent out the letter on May 20.
The facility handles correspondence from the surrounging (sic) area and parts of Texas and Arkansas."
http://www.nypost.com/p/news/national/suspect_who_sent_poison_letters_4gmXqZyj1N1dklbeWs1cAO





katydid23 said: ↑

Where are people getting ricin?
Isn't that pretty impossible to come by?


When they spoke about this case on GMA this morning, they said ricin is easy to make.
OTOH, they also said that this stuff from the past few days was basically harmless.
It was ricin, but wouldn't cause anyone to get sick.
Great!
So now the next copy-cat will be sure his stuff is toxic!
:banghead: JMHO fran




One of Ann Rule's best books (imo) was Bitter Harvest.
"Debora Green (born Debora Jones, February 28, 1951) is an American physician who pleaded no contest to setting a 1995 fire which burned down her family's home and killed two of her children, and to poisoning her husband with ricin with the intention of causing his death.
The case was sensational, and covered heavily by news media, especially in the Kansas-Missouri area, where the crimes occurred.
Crime writer Ann Rule covered the case in her book Bitter Harvest: A Woman's Fury, a Mother's Sacrifice.
Though Green has claimed in recent years that her plea was placed during a period of diminished mental capacity, she has not been granted a new trial."
More... http://murderpedia.org/female.G/g/green-debora.htm




'Walking Dead' actress, husband, accuse each other of ricin letters (Gawker) Worth a look.





Kimberlyd125 said: ↑

There are crazy people everywhere.
Not just Shreveport, LA.
I still think Louisiana is the greatest state in the nation.
I am proud of my state.
And always will be.
It's not defined by the actions of one.
JMO Oh I agree, one crazy doesn't define a whole state, but back around election time I heard quite a few comments regarding using less than peaceful means to express disgust at the outcome.
I just meant it doesn't at all surprise me that the letters came from here.
There are alot of really angry people who hate Obama 'round here.
That's all.





LaLaw2000 said: ↑

Being that my late husband was a retired City of Shreveport police officer, I take exception to not being proud of the city.
People there are no different than in any other relatively large city.
It is not the fault of the many truly good citizens that a nut either from there or even someone passing through may be responsible for that letter being mailed with that postmark.
I suspect it was someone passing through - just my own personal opinion.
MOOClick to expand...
I only meant that it was not at all surprising to me that such a letter would have come from this area.
There is a very real and palpable anger and hatred towards certain political figures and movements.
Including expressing vocally the intent (which I usually don't take seriously, but maybe now I will) to do harm to those people.
So, I really am not too proud of my area when my neighbors behave like that.
But it's just MOO.





FrayedKnot said: ↑

Oh I agree, one crazy doesn't define a whole state, but back around election time I heard quite a few comments regarding using less than peaceful means to express disgust at the outcome.
I just meant it doesn't at all surprise me that the letters came from here.
There are alot of really angry people who hate Obama 'round here.
That's all.
The letters may have been sent from Shreveport, but that doesn't mean the sender lived there; it appears that the current POI lives in Texas.


NEW BOSTON, TX -- A law enforcement official says a Texas home has been searched and a resident interviewed as part of the investigation into ricin-tainted letters sent to New York City's mayor and President Barack Obama. ...
New Boston is located near the Oklahoma and Arkansas borders.
The law enforcement official says the FBI initiated the search after being contacted by the resident's spouse.
http://abclocal.go.com/ktrk/story?section=news/state=9123928Click to expand...

i.b.nora said: ↑

"The man lives roughly 100 miles from the Shreveport, La.
mail hub that sent out the letter on May 20.
The facility handles correspondence from the surrounging (sic) area and parts of Texas and Arkansas."
http://www.nypost.com/p/news/national/suspect_who_sent_poison_letters_4gmXqZyj1N1dklbeWs1cAO And it appears the marriage is not a happy one, maybe?


CBS/AP/ May 31, 2013, 7:08 PM Texas couple blames each other for ricin-laced letters Updated at 6:45 p.m. NEW BOSTON, Texas A Texas woman has told investigators her husband may have sent ricin-laced letters to President Barack Obama, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and Bloomberg's Washington-based gun control group, CBS News' Anna Werner reports.
But the woman's husband has accused his wife, saying he was set up.
http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-201_162-57587176/texas-couple-blames-each-other-for-ricin-laced-letters/Click to expand...




Hmm.
Apparently the wife is a Zombie actress, "currently pregnant but the two are going through a divorce.
Guess has five other children from previous relationships, on top of the one she's currently carrying with Richardson."
Ricin plots are always more complicated and weird.
http://www.theatlanticwire.com/nati...ach-other-mailing-latest-ricin-letters/65793/





PoirotryInMotion said: ↑

Hmm.
Apparently the wife is a Zombie actress, "currently pregnant but the two are going through a divorce.
Guess has five other children from previous relationships, on top of the one she's currently carrying with Richardson."
Ricin plots are always more complicated and weird.
http://www.theatlanticwire.com/nati...ach-other-mailing-latest-ricin-letters/65793/ And she's been arrested!
Another freakin' sociopath!
:banghead: Shannon Richardson has been arrested for allegedly sending ricin-laced letters to President Barack Obama, New York City's Mayor Michael Bloomberg and Bloomberg's gun control group in Washington D.C. Shannon's husband, Nathan Richardson, was named as a person of interest after Shannon contacted authorities about a suspicious substance she found in their refrigerator.
"We have very good reason to believe it was a setup," said Delk.
http://www.ktbs.com/story/22512085/ricin-letter-investigation




With video http://www.ksla.com/story/22531795/sources-wife-arrested-in-new-boston-ricin-investigation




####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = video game development
document number 1: 
Chat logs show how 4chan users created #GamerGate controversy


A man harasses a woman while another man kind of stands around doing nothing.
A beautiful microcosm of recent events.


A set of IRC logs released Saturday appear to show that a handful of 4chan users were ultimately behind #GamerGate, the supposedly grass-roots movement aimed at exposing ethical lapses in gaming journalism.
The logs show a small group of users orchestrating a "hashtag campaign" to perpetuate misogynistic attacks by wrapping them in a debate about ethics in gaming journalism.

Further Reading


The death of the "gamers" and the women who "killed" them

The saga grew from a single blog post written by an ex-boyfriend of Zoe Quinn, a game developer who designed

Depression Quest

.
The post was a lengthy diatribe filled with details about Quinn's alleged relationships with men, including a tryst with a gaming journalist who works for Kotaku.
Anonymous users on reddit and 4chan spun this material into a story about how Quinn allegedly slept with multiple gaming journalists in return for coverage, though the allegations did not support such a claim.
The journalist in question had quoted Quinn, once, months before they dated; he never wrote about her or her development efforts again.

Nevertheless, Quinn soon had her accounts hacked and her personal information stolen (experiences she was accused of fabricating).
Quinn's opponents tried to turn the entire situation into an ethical debate about the relationship between gaming press and game developers.

The "ethics controversy" then sucked in Anita Sarkeesian, founder of Feminist Frequency, a video series aimed at exploring systemic misogyny in video games.
Sarkeesian is no stranger to harassment; she has received a series of threats for her Feminist Frequency video series since the day its Kickstarter raised more money ($150,000) than she had requested ($6,000).
The amount of money raised incensed Sarkeesian's critics, and after her August 25 video, "Women as Background Decoration, Part 2," Sarkeesian received graphic rape and death threats, eventually leaving her home after one of her harassers tweeted her own address at her.

The Quinn and Sarkeesian events led several publications (Ars included) to discuss the notion of a "gamer."
In this context, "gamer" does not mean "all people who play video games"—a group now broad enough to easily outgrow the term's narrow origins in '80s toy marketing.
Instead, the term more narrowly refers to hard-core video game fans, who skew young and male.
In the words of Leigh Alexander at Gamasutra, it was through catering to this group that video games came to overemphasize guns, women, and money.
With the industry expanding its horizons, some "gamers" felt left behind in a world that has started to turn against aspects of their favorite pastime.
Under this view, "gaming" itself is under threat.

Quinn and Sarkeesian became lightning rods for "gamers" of this sort, and thus was born "#GamerGate," a hashtag that became a breeding ground for all kinds of conspiracy theories surrounding the "corrupt" systems that allowed Quinn and Sarkeesian to figure in the industry as they do.
As the hashtag spread, spectators got increasingly drawn into arguments about the ethics governing relationships between game developers and the gaming press.

#GamerGate spread through Twitter and reddit and eventually drew high profile support from actor Adam Baldwin.
Eventually a second hashtag sprouted, #notyourshield, which was pitched as an "attempt by the worldwide gaming community to show that this isn’t just male gamers who are speaking about gamergate, and this isn’t an issue of hating feminism or not wanting women in the community."

Enlarge / One of the IRC log screenshots tweeted by Zoe Quinn.


Discussion logs, however, suggest that #notyourshield didn't begin as a broad movement but was a campaign manufactured and orchestrated by 4chan users via sockpuppet Twitter accounts.
And, according to screenshots recently released by Quinn, so was the original #GamerGate.

"But seriously, I think we're doing pretty good on the #GamerGate front," wrote user OperationDunk in a "quinnspiracy" IRC channel.
"Lot of support, and a ton of people are picking up the self-chastising when people start getting insulting.
It took a few days of 4-5 of us doing it but it's taking off."

As for #notyourshield, its first reference appears on the /v/ video games board on 4chan as a suggestion for responding to "social justice warriors" who claimed the #GamerGate campaign was misogynistic.
"Something like #NotYourShield and demand the SJWs stop using you as a shield to deflect genuine criticism," an anonymous user wrote on September 2.

Enlarge / The anonymous posting on 4chan that allegedly invents the #notyourshield hashtag.


Enlarge / This account used to astroturf the #GamerGate and #notyourshield hashtags uses a stock image of a redhead from Cheezburger.a_girl_irl


As with the manufactured campaign #EndFathersDay, sockpuppet accounts appear to have figured heavily in getting the #GamerGate and #notyourshield campaigns going.
The sockpuppets pushing the hashtags were easy to identify by their low post counts, the fact that they tweeted about little other than #GamerGate and #notyourshield, and reverse image searches of their avatars that showed the photos to belong to people who likely didn't own the accounts in question.

Another of the screenshots posted by Quinn shows IRC users referencing "sleeper cells" at a gaming conference.
"I think all the sleeper cells are hard at work, there was a bit of organizing last night," wrote the user Prawnzilla.
"If anything goes down at PAX [Penny Arcade Expo], and she approaches those folks, they better be diplomatic and let her bitch fit her way into humiliation."
Quinn commented on the screenshot in a tweet: "SLEEPER CELLS.
Probably the people who showed at my panel and took photos for 4chan."
The logs also allegedly include at least two appearances by Eron Gjoni, the author of the original blog post about Quinn.

4chan members have denounced the logs to The Escapist, saying they are misinterpreted by Quinn.
Both 4chan and Quinn provided copies of their logs to The Escapist; 4chan's copies do not include quotes about sleeper cells or the bit about 4-5 users said to have started #GamerGate, since they are from a different channel (#burgersandfries).
They do include references to starting sleeper-cell Twitter accounts and "digging up dirt" on both Quinn and Sarkeesian.

The site We Hunted The Mammoth scoured the full transcript released by 4chan, turning up gems from some anons like, "i couldnt care less about vidya, i just want to see zoe receive her comeuppance."
In another exchange, user Cyberserker says to another user, "You need a reason..." User Opfag responds, "Well I don't have a legitimate reason.
I just want to see her die horribly."

After hours of reading the chat logs, David Futrelle of We Hunted the Mammoth summed them up:

The 4channers express their hatred and disgust towards [Quinn]; they express their glee at the thought of ruining her career; they fantasize about her being raped and killed.
They wonder if all the harassment will drive her to suicide, and only the thought of 4chan getting bad publicity convinces some of them that this isn’t something they should hope for.
They gleefully distribute nude pictures of her, posting links to online archives of them and emailing them directly both to Quinn’s supporters.
They dig up all sorts of information about her and her family and do their best to track down anyone and everyone with even the most tenuous links to her.
One industrious researcher even manages to find a picture of Quinn at age 13; while acknowledging that it had no relevance whatsoever to issues of gaming ethics, she posts a link to it anyway.


While the hashtag campaigns gained steam and was eventually sustained by a larger population, the the chat logs shed new light on the motivations and actions of those who did the most to push #GamerGate into the spotlight.

[Editors Note: For those focused on the kernel of actual valid issues of game journalism ethics somehow churned up during this whole mess, this post over on my personal blog may be of interest.
For general questions over the tone or style or amount or timing of coverage of GameGate, Rock Paper Shotgun sums up our feelings nicely.
-Kyle Orland]

Update: To clarify the above article, actor Adam Baldwin was the first to use the hashtag #GamerGate, according to results on the Twitter analytics website Topsy as noted by Cathode Debris.
Baldwin used the hashtag when tweeting links to pre-existing misogynistic corruption conspiracy theory videos surrounding Quinn and Sarkeesian.
The logs show that organizers quickly adopted the hashtag to further organize their efforts.



####
document number 2: 
Boycott update


For those interested understanding exactly where the boycott is coming from and what is at stake.
All questions can be directed to @ace on discord or justanace on the xbox.

I have been given permission from justanace to post this as he is the author of everything below.

@everyone Hey guys, JustAnAce and Thai Viper are reaching out to you and looking for your support and that of your following in an effort to get Wargaming to do a better job at listening to their community.

What they propose is that we boycott World of Tanks for the weekend of June 30 and take a stand against the inclusion of the Patch Kits.
Adding health regeneration in any form completely changes the dynamic of the game.
If this becomes permanent the Meta of the game will be forever changed.
Nothing this game-changing has ever been introduce into WoT, so if we let this slide, then who's to say that WG won't introduce more changes that turn this game into a mere shell of its former self.
WoT has been going to [edited]for that last two years and it’s only going to keep getting worse unless we, as a community, do something drastic.
It's only a matter of time before they do something really stupid, like introduce a crew skill that gives you health regeneration or something that completely breaks the game.
The patch kits are a prime example of the new creative direction WG is taking the game in.

This is about standing up to WG as a community and ensuring that our voices are heard.
That we do not condone the direction they are taking this game in.
Believe us, we know the patch kits will allow for some very high damage games due to health regeneration, but we need to look at the long term consequence of that.
If we play during the patch kit weekend, we are supporting WG's choice to implement this whether we think so or not.

For Honor was boycotted for a day earlier this year by its community because of the developer's failure to listen to feedback and release patches to balance the combat and improve matchmaking and connection issues.
After which the developer apologized and started working with its community.
It’s hopefully going to be the same deal here, but this needs to be a collective effort.
All manner of differences, conflicts, and rivalries need to be set aside because this will be helping all of us if we pull this off.
In all, the addition of Patch Kits is part of a larger problem.
That is WG not giving a [edited]about what any of the knowledgeable members of the community say and spouting [edited]statistics to support their way even though we've explained it away a thousand times over.
If we do this then we might finally convince WG to care about their active community and implement changes that actually balance the game.

We need to spread this message to our players, and later to our community.
Ace and other supporters of the boycott plan on making a YouTube video announcing this boycott.
Ace will add the name of your clan to the video and announce your support.
There is a tremendous amount of players that have have walked away from the game due to WG's failure to listen to their community, as well as the backlash the announcement of Patch Kits have caused on the forums has been immense.
In addition, if your clan has YouTubers, we encourage you to ask them to support the boycott through their channels.
Once the video is made, it will post it on the forums and ask for the support of the community.
This is an opportunity for us, the community to stand together against WG's [edited]"creative" direction.
If we pull this off, maybe WG will finally do a better job at listening to us, and we can get the improvements to both standard and competitive play that this game deserves.

The disparity of strength in our +2/-2 tier matchmaking system will be even greater thus making grinds harder and punishing those that choose to play for free even more.
As people who pay will be able to use patch kits, free xp, or shoot more gold.
So in essence this will encourage spending more money on the game which directly correlates with the Pay2Win model.
HP disparity between tiers is exacerbated.
a tier X will get more HP back than a tier 8 in the same game.
Have fun dealing with that regenerating E-100 in your Pershinng or T-44.

Superheavy platoons will steamroll.
Platooning in purely Maus and Type 5 platoons with patch kits sounds fun for us but terrible for the game.
Actually doesn't a FV215b that can trade 20% more effectively sound worse than that?

Premium vehicles will gain more advantage than their tech tree counterparts in some cases: TOG vs Churchhill VII, most of the tier 5 pref mediums have more hp than tech tree tanks, Hammer has 50hp more than Tigers, Rampanzer is already op.

These kits are useless in mid tiers and overturned at high tiers.
For tier 6 or 7s you will get less than one 122mm shells worth of hp back, but the E-100, Maus, Type 5, IS-4, and FV215b will benefit greatly.
This isn't just a 'new consumable', this is a further example and drastic change from WG making this game further Pay2Win and ignoring the evidence balance and gameplay issues.
These kits are not just the same sort of thing as a Food Consumable, they benefit some tanks more than others drastically, whereas food benefits all tanks.
For example, a tank with really strong gun stats will not benefit in that area much from food, however it would benefit in other areas where it is weaker say, view range for example (this requires tanks to be balanced and have good and bad aspects ha ha).
This however is a new level of discrimination, it disproportionately benefits large HP pool tanks compared to lower HP tanks.
And you pay for this 'buff' that cannot be balanced apart from making all tanks HP equal.

This Saturday (June 10) at 5 pm eastern we will be streaming a conference where we will discuss the pros and cons of the patch kits and their implications.
Check it out on either of these channels: http://www.twitch.tv/mad_hatter_tv http://www.twitch.tv/tvdl2000


Current list of folks agreeing to boycott the game the weekend of patch kits.

UPDATED

Clans that pledged their support so far: KMD BK 7F 12PZR LGND NFTG -N- SELVA 3RDAX TLS DP -P- -FC- FAME CRPT BULL TNG IMTLS CHART RDY5 HAZE 19R NOOT -CDN- 47R IH RDDT -OFF- --V-- LTA -LVDF MST3K DCENT EXXE 1TDPT RDDT2 SP-W 61ST The Blue Legion I44I STRYK

The Spanish speaking comp community and their 3500 member facebook group

The BULL facebook groups of 7,300 and 4,300 members

The Hungarian WoT Community

The WCL Staff

The WNF Staff

BeardGuys pledged to tweet out our boycott thread in support

There are more top and big clans that are in favor, but awaiting confirmation on this.
Going to contact more clans still.


I say we have a sit-in at the WG headquarters with signs like, "Down with Patch $hit weekend", "Patch THIS...
WG!
", "A Patch in time saves nine!
", "Patch your servers instead...they're TRASH!
", etc.


I would like to add this to the discussion as both a player of WoT and EVE; looking at things with that kind of perspective.

http://forum-console...83#entry3802983


I have been boycotting the game for about a month now anyway, so sign me up.


Now, is WG really listening.... time will tell.....


At the risk of a dissenting opinion, I'd rather play, get the facts first hand on how they affect my entertainment and make an informed decision.

I do not agree or disagree with the comments/perceptions/assumptions nor their authors but certainly think declining an opportunity to verify the comments/perceptions/assumptions eliminates ones ability to debate or make judgement on fact.

If one boycotts, they willfully deny themselves the opportunity to gain an informed perspective and are left with concluding on an uninformed one.
Not my style folks.

Enjoy your weekend off, have some fun and if everything said here proves accurate, I'll be the first to say, "confirmed".

If it goes the other way, the uninformed will still have the chance for redemption unless they choose to persist on staying that way.


VKSheridan, on 07 June 2017 - 12:50 AM, said:

At the risk of a dissenting opinion, I'd rather play, get the facts first hand on how they affect my entertainment and make an informed decision.

More yoloing and still throwing tanks away even with the health regeneration spell cast.

Base kemp snipers kemp base harder thinking that when they cast regen they'll be in a better spot to take out the final bosses.

Skill gap between best and below average players would widen.

Saving the best for last:

SuperTesters overwhelming did not want them in the game.


It doesn't take much thought to understand how this will

negatively affect the game

.
It changes things too much and the ones who will suffer are those that are not very good and those who are trying to play the game for what it is,

free

.
Higher HP vehicles have the advantage getting 20% more HP back (Maus at tier 10 (3600 hp), V/IV at tier 5 (1044 hp lol), T23E3 tier 7 (1728 hp), Tiger 1 and variants at tier 7 (1800 hp).
To have such a direct competitive advantage it doesn't take much to know that it is going to get into the

pay to win

area and those who don't buy the premium consumable will be struggling more.
With many players that try to play without premium time/tanks it is difficult to try to spend 20k credits each battle to stay as competitive and they will be more pressured than they already are to either buy premium/tanks, play at a disadvantage or leave the game.


Hey guys, this was left out

"Finally we encourage you to donate any money you were planning to spend on the game to a better cause such as a veterans charity like Help For Heroes (UK) or The Fisher House Foundation (US).
These Charities are much more deserved of your money than WarGaming"


JustAnAce, on 06 June 2017 - 07:27 PM, said:

Hey guys, this was left out

"Finally we encourage you to donate any money you were planning to spend on the game to a better cause such as a veterans charity like Help For Heroes (UK) or The Fisher House Foundation (US).
These Charities are much more deserved of your money than WarGaming"


Suppose every projected outcome is certain - What will influence WG the most - Candid feedback from open minded players who actively participated in the test or those that took the weekend off and simply regurgitate hearsay to affirm their skepticism?


VKSheridan, on 06 June 2017 - 05:33 PM, said:

Suppose every projected outcome is certain - What will influence WG the most - Candid feedback from open minded players who actively participated in the test or those that took the weekend off and simply regurgitate hearsay to affirm their skepticism?

the supertesters said no yet WG is still shoving health regeneration kits down our throat.
Perhaps you dont see what they implicate but I encourage you to check out the livestream conference we will have this Saturday at 5pm eastern.
Check it out here:

http://www.twitch.tv/mad_hatter_tv

http://www.twitch.tv/tvdl2000

And we will invite WG to partake in the discussion.


VKSheridan, on 07 June 2017 - 01:33 AM, said:

Suppose every projected outcome is certain - What will influence WG the most - Candid feedback from open minded players who actively participated in the test or those that took the weekend off and simply regurgitate hearsay to affirm their skepticism?

It is those who know that they simply do not want health regeneration in the game, it is understood where you stand.

Edited by SteelTiiTan, 07 June 2017 - 01:48 AM.


SteelTiiTan, on 06 June 2017 - 07:43 PM, said:

It is those who know that they simply do not want health regeneration in the game, it is understood where you stand.

LOL, I'm painfully neutral and perhaps terribly naive but I'm game for the Livestream.
I'll take their observations under consideration and test them myself if WG does the test weekend.
Easy peasy.


Seems like they look at their facebook page more than the forums, so perhaps that would be the place to show your concerns.


Lots of excellent players in those clans.
Looking forward to a weekend off of great players seal clubbing for the ops that weekend-- give us average Joe's a chance!
Looks like it's mainly good players upset these patches are live for a weekend-- doubt I'll buy any, but will have to see what impact they have.

Edited by hmsmystic, 07 June 2017 - 02:50 AM.


Warthog II, on 06 June 2017 - 05:05 PM, said

SuperTesters overwhelming did not want them in the game.

^^This^^


^^^^^^^Defiantly this^^^^^^

Tier X (Leopard 1, E-50, E-100, Waffle E-100, Jagpanzer e-100, fv4005 Stage 2, T57 Heavy, T92, Type 5 Heavy, Object 430,)) Premium, T2 light, T7 Car, M22 Locust, MTLS-1G14, Lycan T71, M41B Brazil, Ram II, Fury, Freedom, T95E2, T14, Scorpion, T28 HTC, Snakebite, Matilda BP, Centennial T95, Knight, TOG II*, Sexton I, Pz.38h, P.z II D, Pz II.J, P.z T-15, Aufkl.panther, Pz.s35, Gr.Tr, Pz.V/IV, T-25, Hydrostat, Kraft Panther Panther 8.8, Pz.B2, Hammer, Stug IV, E-25, KanJPz, JagTig 8,8, AMX Chaffee, AMX CDC, liberté, FCM 36 Pak 40, 105 leFH18b2, Tetrarch, BT-SV, T-127, M3 Light, Valentine II, T-50-2, Matilda IV, T-34-88, Motherland, Churchill III, IS-2, KV-5, Gorynych KV-5 Su-76i, SU-100Y, ISU-122S, Type 59, Chi-Nu Kai, Kaiju O-I,)


Creamys puppet, on 06 June 2017 - 10:53 PM, said:

Current list of folks agreeing to boycott the game the weekend of patch kits.

UPDATED

Clans that pledged their support so far: KMD BK 7F 12PZR LGND NFTG -N- SELVA 3RDAX TLS DP -P- -FC- FAME CRPT BULL TNG IMTLS CHART RDY5 HAZE 19R NOOT -CDN- 47R IH RDDT -OFF- --V-- LTA -LVDF MST3K DCENT EXXE 1TDPT RDDT2 SP-W 61ST The Blue Legion I44I STRYK

The Spanish speaking comp community and their 3500 member facebook group

The BULL facebook groups of 7,300 and 4,300 members

The Hungarian WoT Community

The WCL Staff

The WNF Staff

BeardGuys pledged to tweet out our boycott thread in support

There are more top and big clans that are in favor, but awaiting confirmation on this.
Going to contact more clans still.

wait no 7F, IMTLS, FC?
I'm playing my butt off that weekend!
Seriously though, I agree these patch kits are not good.
But boycotting will leave player feedback entirely to scrubs who played that weekend and who will inevitably like them.
Meanwhile WG probably shouldn't listen to feedback from players who don't even try it out.
Hopefully stats, MOE's and Ace tankers won't be counted


My YouTube


My Map Guide


VKSheridan, on 07 June 2017 - 12:50 AM, said:

At the risk of a dissenting opinion, I'd rather play, get the facts first hand on how they affect my entertainment and make an informed decision.

I do not agree or disagree with the comments/perceptions/assumptions nor their authors but certainly think declining an opportunity to verify the comments/perceptions/assumptions eliminates ones ability to debate or make judgement on fact.

If one boycotts, they willfully deny themselves the opportunity to gain an informed perspective and are left with concluding on an uninformed one.
Not my style folks.

Enjoy your weekend off, have some fun and if everything said here proves accurate, I'll be the first to say, "confirmed".

If it goes the other way, the uninformed will still have the chance for redemption unless they choose to persist on staying that way.

By doing this you're playing into their hand.
They just announced that everyone will get them free when they login....now why have they done this?
Lets think......

Oh so they can announce that based on their data everyone had them and played with them if they wanted to or not and thus it will support their argument that they are popular and should be used in the future.


pepelefrogg, on 07 June 2017 - 12:46 AM, said:

wait no 7F, IMTLS, FC?
I'm playing my butt off that weekend!
Seriously though, I agree these patch kits are not good.
But boycotting will leave player feedback entirely to scrubs who played that weekend and who will inevitably like them.
Meanwhile WG probably shouldn't listen to feedback from players who don't even try it out.
Hopefully stats, MOE's and Ace tankers won't be counted

This.


Nuke2099, on 07 June 2017 - 10:03 AM, said:

By doing this you're playing into their hand.
They just announced that everyone will get them free when they login....now why have they done this?
Lets think......

Oh so they can announce that based on their data everyone had them and played with them if they wanted to or not and thus it will support their argument that they are popular and should be used in the future.

lolwat?

no,everyone gets a free regen kit so that they can try them out, its pretty standard marketing.
Free Samples?

I don't like the idea of this mechanic at all but I am going to test it out so I can tell tell people exactly why

I've just realised there's a good chance I'll be away that weekend so probably wont get the chance to take part lol.
But in principal I would want to try them out

Edited by IronBallsMatt, 07 June 2017 - 10:22 AM.


I won't boycott.
I will farm all that 20% extra damage to finally get my third mark on my FCM 50t and T34.


Video by ace.

https://youtu.be/HX6FeGlm7HI


IronBallsMatt, on 07 June 2017 - 05:19 AM, said:

its pretty standard marketing.
Free Samples?

Yes.. standard marketing..

Why it works so well for drug dealers..

Dark


Darkgift, on 07 June 2017 - 11:47 AM, said:

Yes.. standard marketing..

Why it works so well for drug dealers..

Dark

I have worked with addicts and this remark is inappropriate

dealers target disadvantaged neighbourhoods (are often from them) and coerce people into taking their product, knowing it will set them on a path from which they can't return

but this is not the same in any way.

I know this is the internet but generally I have found the WoT forums amongst the more helpful and supportive.
But everyone who has suggested a moderate approach to this patch and don't support the baycott, have been dismissed.
Nothing is at stake here in real terms, no picket line is being crossed and no one is being forced into playing this game.

I'm a big fan of Bill Hicks who essentially said all marketing is telling lies to sell poison to kids.

But get over it, one big thing we take for granted with consumerism is that it is democratic.
Yes boycott, and WG will know there are angry people out there who don't want to try the new toy.
Go for it, good luck

But don't hit out at those who want to see for themselves - because if it is a crappy idea (and I think it may well be) people will walk from the game anyway.
We all want WoT to be the best it can be, remember that

/rant


Trumps W2 Form, on 07 June 2017 - 02:12 AM, said:

Seems like they look at their facebook page more than the forums, so perhaps that would be the place to show your concerns.

Those Facebook pages have pledged towards this boycott


IronBallsMatt, on 07 June 2017 - 07:22 AM, said:

I have worked with addicts and this remark is inappropriate

coerce people into taking their product, knowing it will set them on a path from which they can't return

1) what you do in real life has no bearing on anything I do or say..

2) if you think my original statement is inappropriate.. don't care..

3) your coercing statement proves my point exactly..

Anyone can be addicted to anything..

Same basic principles for all marketing/drug dealers..

Dark


Nuke2099, on 07 June 2017 - 04:03 AM, said:

By doing this you're playing into their hand.
They just announced that everyone will get them free when they login....now why have they done this?
Lets think......

Oh so they can announce that based on their data everyone had them and played with them if they wanted to or not and thus it will support their argument that they are popular and should be used in the future.

ROFLMAO....
The basis of rejection is many folks are certain it will be adopted as a regular consumable in every game.
Guess what, I tried the Toy Tank, got one free like everyone else and played it but WG didn't convert us from shells to darts and change all the maps to toy stores amigo.

Since when is having an open mind and forming an informed opinion considered "playing into their hand"?
Hopping on a lemming train of assumption and rejecting the chance to personally see what the angst is all about might be a popular topic in these forums but it will only create a bigger vacuum of informed perspective.
There's enough unknowns on this subject, let's not add to it.

Here's all that I can say - If you honestly think WG will accept feedback/suggestions from people who were not even on the server log that weekend, you're stoned.
If you disempower your voice and "the scrubs" get the only voice (and their way), you reap what you sow.

Think that last sentence through guys.
Peace


VKSheridan, on 07 June 2017 - 05:28 AM, said:

ROFLMAO....
The basis of rejection is many folks are certain it will be adopted as a regular consumable in every game.
Guess what, I tried the Toy Tank, got one free like everyone else and played it but WG didn't convert us from shells to darts and change all the maps to toy stores amigo.

Since when is having an open mind and forming an informed opinion considered "playing into their hand"?
Hopping on a lemming train of assumption and rejecting the chance to personally see what the angst is all about might be a popular topic in these forums but it will only create a bigger vacuum of informed perspective.
There's enough unknowns on this subject, let's not add to it.

Here's all that I can say - If you honestly think WG will accept feedback/suggestions from people who were not even on the server log that weekend, you're stoned.
If you disempower your voice and "the scrubs" get the only voice (and their way), you reap what you sow.

Think that last sentence through guys.
Peace

This is my exact same thoughts on this whole thing man.


VKSheridan, on 07 June 2017 - 01:28 PM, said:

ROFLMAO....
The basis of rejection is many folks are certain it will be adopted as a regular consumable in every game.
Guess what, I tried the Toy Tank, got one free like everyone else and played it but WG didn't convert us from shells to darts and change all the maps to toy stores amigo.

Since when is having an open mind and forming an informed opinion considered "playing into their hand"?
Hopping on a lemming train of assumption and rejecting the chance to personally see what the angst is all about might be a popular topic in these forums but it will only create a bigger vacuum of informed perspective.
There's enough unknowns on this subject, let's not add to it.

Here's all that I can say - If you honestly think WG will accept feedback/suggestions from people who were not even on the server log that weekend, you're stoned.
If you disempower your voice and "the scrubs" get the only voice (and their way), you reap what you sow.

Think that last sentence through guys.
Peace

They are already taking public notice of the boycott and it has been evident, no other times have I seen player feedback anywhere on here actually recognized unless it is a serious bug.
Have fun trying them out, allow those who feel this is a better route to take it.
Anyone who has read the boycott threads has seen your arguments.

Edited by SteelTiiTan, 07 June 2017 - 03:10 PM.


SteelTiiTan, on 07 June 2017 - 04:09 PM, said:

They are already taking public notice of the boycott and it has been evident, no other times have I seen player feedback anywhere on here actually recognized unless it is a serious bug.
Have fun trying them out, allow those who feel this is a better route to take it.
Anyone who has read the boycott threads has seen your arguments.

I really don't know if wargaming cares about this boycott.

And the comic book mode actually got recognized too, and faster and actions were taken.

Anyway good luck with your boycott.
I will farm damage for the third mark on my FCM 50t and T34 that weekend.


VKSheridan, on 07 June 2017 - 01:28 PM, said:

ROFLMAO....
The basis of rejection is many folks are certain it will be adopted as a regular consumable in every game.
Guess what, I tried the Toy Tank, got one free like everyone else and played it but WG didn't convert us from shells to darts and change all the maps to toy stores amigo.

Since when is having an open mind and forming an informed opinion considered "playing into their hand"?
Hopping on a lemming train of assumption and rejecting the chance to personally see what the angst is all about might be a popular topic in these forums but it will only create a bigger vacuum of informed perspective.
There's enough unknowns on this subject, let's not add to it.

Here's all that I can say - If you honestly think WG will accept feedback/suggestions from people who were not even on the server log that weekend, you're stoned.
If you disempower your voice and "the scrubs" get the only voice (and their way), you reap what you sow.

Think that last sentence through guys.
Peace

You're comparing a marketing test that will make the game worse to a one off seasonal mode......You lost your argument right there.


DutchCupid62, on 07 June 2017 - 03:32 PM, said:

I really don't know if wargaming cares about this boycott.

And the comic book mode actually got recognized too, and faster and actions were taken.

Anyway good luck with your boycott.
I will farm damage for the third mark on my FCM 50t and T34 that weekend.

You actually need need the patch kits to farm damage for a third mark?


i'll be crossing the line to play the game there is no need for a boycott until its been played, you can gather the information and facts and throw that at wargaming after, not before


Nuke2099, on 07 June 2017 - 04:42 PM, said:

You actually need need the patch kits to farm damage for a third mark?

No not really but it always helps


DutchCupid62, on 07 June 2017 - 04:19 PM, said:

No not really but it always helps

I won't deny it will help.


I mean, I'll try it, if it's cancerous, I'll avoid it, possibly gonna start playing Crossout more


every mmo dies the same way.....by changing its core mechanics....rest in peace pre EOC runescape.....sweet prince of grinding and trolling


hexine, on 07 June 2017 - 04:44 PM, said:

every mmo dies the same way.....by changing its core mechanics....rest in peace pre EOC runescape.....sweet prince of grinding and trolling

They try to change thier core mechanics because?

Infinate growth is impossible.

Adapt and die, or don't adapt and die faster.
Welcome to the gaming world.

I'll be playing because I enjoy playing.
Nothing real is at stake here.
Lives, economies, humanity, it's all safe.
I'll only stop playing when it is no longer fun.
Until then, see ya on the battlefield.


Hey guys.
We recognize the response to our announcement of testing patch kits, and we want you to be included in the ongoing conversation with the attention of the Dev team, that's happening here:

http://forum-console..._st__40#topmost


ahhh yes things that happen when you take people out of their comfort zone....oh noooo something different that makes me have to change my gameplay....lol


TSK TSK 16, on 07 June 2017 - 08:33 PM, said:

ahhh yes things that happen when you take people out of their comfort zone....oh noooo something different that makes me have to change my gameplay....lol

No, that is completely ignorant to what is happening.


Chimonakimi, on 07 June 2017 - 12:48 PM, said:

No, that is completely ignorant to what is happening.

ooohhhh nnnoooo patch kits....my goodness the sky is falling......oooohhh nnnoooo lets boycott yeah...without even trying them


TSK TSK 16, on 07 June 2017 - 08:52 PM, said:

ooohhhh nnnoooo patch kits....my goodness the sky is falling......oooohhh nnnoooo lets boycott yeah...without even trying them

U r crap player, it's obvious that it does not matter to you.


TonkFu, on 07 June 2017 - 01:03 PM, said:

U r crap player, it's obvious that it does not matter to you.

right on time....fully expected the stat bashing fallback...you guys crack me up..no intelligent response so lets fall back on the stat bashing...gg


You dont need to eat a handfull of sand know its not going to make an amazing dish.

There is nothing about putting Health Kits in this game that will make it better , absolutely nothing , unless we are wanting the next version of a cool Nintendo game.


Chimonakimi, on 07 June 2017 - 02:48 PM, said:

No, that is completely ignorant to what is happening.

^^correct^^


TSK TSK 16, on 07 June 2017 - 08:52 PM, said:

ooohhhh nnnoooo patch kits....my goodness the sky is falling......oooohhh nnnoooo lets boycott yeah...without even trying them

I wouldn't even go for a stat bash, I'd go for a general intelligence bash.
These kits are unnecessary and will promote gameplay that is awful, AKA "YOLO and die", but no, whatever you want to believe, believe it's a temper tantrum or whatever.
Just remember who was trying to stop this game going to [edited]when it does.


Chimonakimi, on 07 June 2017 - 01:34 PM, said:

I wouldn't even go for a stat bash, I'd go for a general intelligence bash.
These kits are unnecessary and will promote gameplay that is awful, AKA "YOLO and die", but no, whatever you want to believe, believe it's a temper tantrum or whatever.
Just remember who was trying to stop this game going to [edited]when it does.

fyi: its just a video game...that already HAS gone to ....


Chimonakimi, on 07 June 2017 - 01:34 PM, said:

I wouldn't even go for a stat bash, I'd go for a general intelligence bash.
These kits are unnecessary and will promote gameplay that is awful, AKA "YOLO and die", but no, whatever you want to believe, believe it's a temper tantrum or whatever.
Just remember who was trying to stop this game going to [edited]when it does.

lol now not only am i "ignorant" my "general intelligence" isnt very good either...one and the same i guess..lol like i said before its just a video game.
why do you resort to cheap shots instead of "intelligent" responses?


Chowder-Keg, on 07 June 2017 - 07:14 PM, said:

Hey guys.
We recognize the response to our announcement of testing patch kits, and we want you to be included in the ongoing conversation with the attention of the Dev team, that's happening here:

http://forum-console..._st__40#topmost


TSK TSK 16, on 07 June 2017 - 09:43 PM, said:

lol now not only am i "ignorant" my "general intelligence" isnt very good either...one and the same i guess..lol like i said before its just a video game.
why do you resort to cheap shots instead of "intelligent" responses?

I mean, I've literally just put out the reasoning and once again you ignore it..


Chimonakimi, on 07 June 2017 - 01:56 PM, said:

I mean, I've literally just put out the reasoning and once again you ignore it..

well the "reasoning" is your opinion.
you dont REALLY know what the patch kits are going to do to the game..do you?
why dont we try them and then if they dont work you will have in battle reasons to lay on wg.
instead of boycotts and all the other uproar that is going before they are even tried

Edited by TSK TSK 16, 07 June 2017 - 10:06 PM.


TSK TSK 16, on 07 June 2017 - 10:01 PM, said:

well the "reasoning" is your opinion.
you dont REALLY know what the patch kits are going to do to the game..do you?
why dont we try them and then if they dont work you will have in battle reasons to lay on wg.
instead of boycotts and all the other uproar that is going before they are even tried

If you don't understand what the gameplay implications of patch kits are then it is pretty evident you should not be bashing people against them.


Per PainGod:

"Good thing about announcing the test early, however mis-messaged it was, is it also allows for feedback on possible issues as well as player sentiment.
The concerns about Medals of Excellence and Ace Tanker medals, etc were quite valid and not easy to account for with Patch Kit testing.
So thanks for the feedback on that and all the rest.

Since the original point of the test was to try out something new and have fun those two reasons alone are enough to cancel it.
No fun = No test

Thanks again Tankers."


Still gonna boycott for the sake of boycotting.


http://forum-console...patch-kits-talk

Boycott worked before it started!



####
document number 3: 
Our KickStarter Experience – Part 2: Results



This is Part 2 to our Kickstarter Experience.
The article will highlight some of the analytics and results for our Chicken Heist KickStarter Campaign, as well as what to expect.
If you are curious about our preparation months leading up to our KS campaign, please check out part 1 in the following link: Our KickStarter Experience Part 1: Preparation

In Part 1 of our article, we talked about our plan which consisted of Sending Emails, Posting on Social Media, Joining Facebook Groups, Connecting with Backers and Supporters, and Updating our Backers.

SETTING UP FOR THE CAMPAIGN


Sending Emails

As mentioned in the Part 1, 550 emails were collected from Terminal City Tabletop Convention, Meeple Leaf Convention, our website (www.fourtato.com), and our Choose-Your-Own-Adventure Interactive Story.
We sent our supporters an email to tell them that the campaign was live with a link to the KickStarter campaign.
All the emails were sent in the first 5 days of the campaign.
369 of those emails were opened and 64 people clicked onto the KickStarter link.
To do some quick math, out of the 550 people who expressed interest to learn more about the game, 11.6% of the people visited the campaign.

Posting on Social Media

Various online resources and Facebook groups tell us the importance of the first four days in KickStarter.
For this, we wanted one team member to reach out to all our followers on all our social media platforms (Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter).

Joining Facebook Groups

We also used our personal Facebook accounts to post on the different board game groups that we were active members in.
Of course, we created personal posts to inform our family and friends that our campaign was live!
We got the most traffic early in the morning and during lunch time which coincides with the periods when we posted our content.

Connecting with Backers and Supporters

We’ve had so many people reach out to tell us how excited they were about the game.
There was an overwhelming amount of support on social media where people would share and retweet our KickStarter Campaign page.
We wanted to make a conscious effort to thank everyone who took time out of their day to support and give us encouragement.
You are awesome!

Updating our Backers

Another team member was dedicated to respond on KickStarter.
We anticipated that there would be comments and questions so it was his job to communicate and send updates to our backers and potential backers.
We wanted to make sure that we are transparent so they know that their money is going directly to funding the development and manufacturing of the game.


We had 511 backers who believed in our game!
Thanks to them we exceeded our goal of $11,300 and even unlocked 2 of our stretch goals.
Helping us upgrade the cards to linen texture and ivory core stock.


Day 1-4

Day 1 was our best day for funding!
We reached 97 backers who helped us hit 28% of our goal.
As expected, the funding slowed down in the subsequent days.
In the next 3 days, we saw an increase to our funding goal of 10%, 5% and 4% respectively.
What we read online was that the first 4-days would determine if your campaign would be successful.
Our campaign reached 47% after our 4 days of funding.
We were on track to meeting our goal.

Day 5-24

As anticipated, the middle portion of the campaign was very slow.
Though expected, it still made us very uneasy and anxious about meeting our goal.
Luckily for us, we had a funding uptick of around 2%-4% per day during this period.

What was interesting was that on Fridays and Saturdays, you can see a mini plateau.
I’ve contacted a couple of board game designers to ask them about this.
They also mentioned that they were surprised that Fridays and weekends had less activity than expected.

On Reddit, there is a post every Sunday to talk about new and expiring KickStarter Campaigns called "KickStarter Roundup" on r/boardgames.
We tried to stay active and create some buzz wherever possible.

Day 24

Get the champagne!
This was the day we hit our goal.
If we look at the Funding Progress graph, we can notice that there was greater activity after the goal was hit.
There could be a couple of reasons for this.
We sent out an update notifying our followers that we hit the goal and that Chicken Heist will be delivered.
From our understanding, some backers will only back projects that they know will succeed, so letting them know that your project is successful, will give them the push to join in on the fun and support the campaign.
Another reason could be because the campaign was ending soon, so backers didn’t want to miss out.

Day 26-30

The last 3-4 days had a massive spike comparable to the initial spike we had when the campaign was first posted.
We made sure to notify our followers that there were only 48 hours left before the campaign was over.
Our conversion rate for followers becoming backers increased from 12% to 21% during the last few days.



####
document number 4: 
Proof of the Outrageous Difference in Media Coverage of White Riots and Black Protests


Black protesters calling for justice versus white sports fans rioting after a game – do you judge them differently?

The media sure does – and so do the police.
This video by Brave New Films exposes exactly why that’s such a huge problem.

The language news outlets use to cover these events have a big influence on public perception – and right now, they’re trying to get you to see (mostly white) rioting sports fans as "rowdy" young people, and to dismiss black protesters as "thugs."

Check out the side by side comparison, and watch what happens when the words and images are switched.
This is chilling proof of why we need to demand fairness in media coverage, and the end of the video has an opportunity for you to do just that.

With Love, The Editors at Everyday Feminism


To learn more about this topic, check out:

Brave New Films has created a quick-strike capability that informs the public, challenges corporate media with the truth, and motivates people to take action on social issues nationwide.
Check out their website, Facebook, and YouTube channel and Twitter @bravenewfilms.




####
document number 5: 
The 4Chan of ‘The Sims’


FYI.


This story is over 5 years old.


I was a cyberbully in a community for "The Sims," and I feel really, really bad about it.

"Go kill yourself," I furiously typed in response to someone's simple question about a video game.
I gleefully hit send and laughed as the person on the other end of the internet probably cried.

This is who I was in secret for several years.
A cyberbully.

Who was addicted to

The Sims

.

It all started in 2000 when my boyfriend brought home a copy of the newly released people simulator

The Sims

.
I had grown up playing video games like SimCity, and I quickly fell in love with being able to control digital people's lives.
I bought a copy of

The Sims

for myself and spent entire days playing it.
I spent hours poring over websites looking for custom content for my Sims, and I could hardly contain my excitement the day EA announced the upcoming release of

The Sims 2

.

I bought

The Sims 2

on release day in 2005.
I was enthralled with the new features of the game; the improved graphics; and the living, breathing Sims.
I had no idea that

The Sims

would lead me to cyberbullying.

Some of my most egregious acts included taking over a teenage girl's forum just because I could; participating in the incessant verbal abuse of one user in a chat room, and suggesting other members should kill themselves for being "stupid."

Yes.
I joined a teenage girl's forum, pretended to be her friend, and then pulled the rug out from under her by taking over her forum.
I gained admin access and started talking trash about her until boredom set in.
She was naïve and trusting, which made her easy prey.

I participated in the verbal abuse of one user of our chat room.
This user would reveal something personal about herself, and we'd all use it as excuse to lambast her.
We called this game "harpooning the whale."
I made fun of her late husband and his criminal past; mocked her for her use of social security, food stamps, and disability (even though I believe in the social safety net and have applied for disability myself in the past); called her special needs children "retards;" and took every opportunity to publicly humiliate her.
If it was vicious, slightly true, and mean, I probably said it to her.

I called for suicide when new users dared to ask a simple question.
Even if I knew the answer to the question being asked, I felt that abusing innocents was more important than being helpful.

The forum I did this on, More Awesome Than You!, expected, encouraged, and actively sought this type of behavior.
The official motto of the site was "MOAR FIGHT," and we were known throughout the community as "the 4Chan of The Sims sites."
However, many of us—myself included—took things too far most of the time.

I had two goals when I joined: to make friends with one particularly mean user, and to join the Senate


After

The Sims 2

was released in 2005, a user on the game's official forum discovered a serious bug.
When a character in the game (a "Sim") acquired over 200 memories it would stop responding to commands, give a little jump, and reset itself to idle.
This "jump bug" was discussed on the forum, and a fix was created by the community member who had found it.
EA quickly banned discussion of the "jump bug," and this user set up his own forum for fixing other bugs he found.
To separate his site from other Sims sites, he encouraged fighting, but his abuse was never as cruel as the abuse the favored members of his site heaped upon every newcomer.
He was usually helpful, with a side of snark.

Forum board names included "Retardo Land" and "Be Less Stupid," where off-topic threads were created or moved to.
Boards like "The War Room" and "Peasantry" were where we discussed strategy related to the game, like AwesomeSpec—the supposed ideal layout for a house.
Creative misspellings, such as "strategery" and "learnings," were encouraged; LOL cat speak and memes peppered threads.
Despite this, the forum had a Grammar Police that looked for grammar infractions and lambasted users for misplaced commas.

People came to the site for many reasons.
Most people came for the fixes, which were available free to all, no registration required.
Others came to abuse people, or to bully the bullies.
I came for the fixes first, but stayed for the bullying.
I had two goals when I joined: to make friends with one particularly mean user, and to join the Senate.

The Senate was where the meanest of the members congregated.
They'd pass punishments and "congratulations" on the peasants.
A "congratulation" was the same as a punishment, just snarkier.
Punishments were usually crude, NSFW, cruel, or silly avatars that were affixed to the user's account by the admin and could not be changed.
I was inducted into the Senate in January 2011—three years after I joined the forum.
I was elated to have been accepted by the cool kids.
I didn't realize we were nothing but tyrants, hardly "cool."

The forum wasn't all abuse and snark, though; we often had deep discussions on topics such as religion, politics, and feminism.
These discussions were surprisingly civil, despite covering such hot-button topics.
When they weren't bullying others, most of the regular members were highly intelligent and presented ideas that made me think long and hard about my own beliefs.
I made good friends with good people, and over the years, we have reconnected on more civil sites.
I mostly limited my outbursts to More Awesome Than You.
Occasionally I'd lambast people on my Facebook, but having my real name attached to my comments kept me from going too far.

Most mental health professionals will tell you that bullies, whether in cyber or real life, are sad individuals who tear others down to make themselves feel good.
I can't speak for everyone who has ever bullied, but I can say that this was true for me.
I felt powerful and important by knowing something others didn't.
My cruelty to others made me feel better about my own past when people had been cruel to me.
I had a lot of pent-up anger and frustration that I didn't know how to deal with in a healthy fashion.

I don't know if even my husband knows how cruel I was to these strangers


I kept my cyberbullying habit a secret from most people in my real life.
To the world, I was still the sweet, kind, but moody individual I'd always been.
It was vitally important to me that my two worlds never met so that I could maintain my real life image of being a good person.
I don't know if even my husband knows how cruel I was to these strangers.

These days the site is mostly dead.
Time moves on, interests change, and people come and go.
Some left because the abuse was too much.
Others left because they quit playing the game.
I stayed around because I couldn't bear to leave.
A handful of users still post, but I'm rarely one of them.
I remain as a lurker, a ghost from times gone by.

I do regret my behavior as a cyberbully.
I have apologized to some of the members that I abused while on that site.
The teenager whose forum I ruined is doing well.
I have befriended the "whale," and gained forgiveness for my actions.
Never again will I suggest someone kill themselves.

I've spent several years in therapy learning how to deal with my anger and stress; I'm not there yet, but I'm working on myself and trying to change for the better.
I have faith that with hard work, these issues will be conquered, and I will look back at my days as a cyberbully with the knowledge that it is part of my past instead of part of my now.
I still play

The Sims

sometimes, but mostly out of nostalgia.
I no longer spend days at a time playing with my little digital people.

Perfect Worlds is a series on Motherboard about simulations, imitations, and models.
Follow along here.


By signing up to the VICE newsletter you agree to receive electronic communications from VICE that may sometimes include advertisements or sponsored content.



####
document number 6: 
*Flashback Friday* – Remember When We Demolished ‘The Dell’


Supporters of West Ham United may have shed a tear or two on Wednesday after the demolition of Upton Park officially got underway.

News of the Boleyn Ground’s demise reminded us of 15 years ago when Hughes and Salvidge was appointed to demolish the former ground of another Premier League club; Southampton FC.

Between 1898 and 2001, The Dell was home for "The Saints" where they plied their trade before relocating to the St Mary’s Stadium.


Following the final game at the famous old ground, a friendly match against Brighton and Hove Albion, which Southampton fittingly won, we moved in and thoroughly prepared the site for demolition.

One of our Director’s took a particularly vested interest in the project; ironically being a fan of Southampton’s fiercest rivals Portsmouth.

The demolition process involved us having to demolish the stadium and its various offices, changing rooms and hospitality facilities, in readiness for the development of a new housing estate on the site.

The various apartment blocks within the housing estate were aptly named after several Southampton legends: Stokes Court, Bates Court, Le Tissier Court, Wallace Court and Channon Court.

You can see several photographs of the Dell before the demolition here: https://www.footballgroundguide.com/old-grounds-and-stands/the_dell_southampton.htm.

If you have a large-scale site that requires our demolition or decommissioning expertise please contact us.



####
document number 7: 
Choosing a Manufacturer - Learn From My Expensive Mistake



When people ask me what I do, I typically respond that I provide financial advice and that I publish board games...
I can see the intrigue in their eyes as they look baffled and ask, "What do you mean a board game publisher?"
or "How did you get into that business?
"The answers to both are simple and basic.
As a board game publisher, I do the following:*Evaluate other people's game designs for potential publication (most of this is handled by Seth Jaffee)*License the Intellectual Property of a game designer*Put the game through our development process (most of this is handled by Seth Jaffee)*Get artwork made*Get the game manufactured*Get the game shipped to the United States*Market the game to consumers and retailers (This is where my personal skills most help Tasty Minstrel Games)The answer to how did you get into that business is simple, "I just decided to do it and got started.
"ManufacturingLearn from my mistake, my very expensive mistake.
I figured that if I could communicate directly with a factory in China, verify their previous products were produced well, and continually work with them that I would be able to produce my games at a lower cost and gain a competitive advantage.Good theory, horrible reality.
I will spare you the gory details, but all of the following happened:*Seth and I flew to the warehouse to perform quality control after the fact.
Cost = 2 flights, 5 hotel nights, and a week away from my day job and family.
*Hundreds of replacement parts and pieces sent out.
The USPS bill was ridiculous.
*Lost about 40% of the print run to mold anyways.
*Homesteaders withstood the problems on the strength of the game.
*Terra Prime which is an excellent game could not withstand the pressures of bad manufacturing.I wanted to puke.
I wanted to quit.
I considered putting all of the games on liquidation as soon as I found out and stop publishing games.
It was devastating.Imagine this, you spend the 4 years prior to starting your publishing company talking to your wife about how you want to do it.
You then spend about 8 months working hard to get the artwork, legal, manufacturing, and so forth done.
You spend a large percentage of your savings.
Now the moment arrives when you see your games for the first time (BGG.con 2009 no less) and the games are not properly collated and they were clearly boxed up wet.It was devastating.
Then the next year, you give away the remaining stock at BGG.con (2010), because it is that or throw it in the trash.
You realize that more of the games are damaged.
People come up to you asking about what to do about the door prize game they got which is moldy.It was devastating.
I do not even like thinking about it now.
Anyways, learn from my mistake and use what I like to call a manufacturing liaison.Manufacturing LiaisonThis is simply a company that works with a factory for you and on your behalf to produce your games for you.
This will not surprise most people, but it surprised me, manufacturing is a complicated process.Board games manufacturing is also complicated, since there are so many parts required which have to come from different places and each part can be made of different materials.That is why you need a company which has people on the ground working with and supervising factories.
Clarifying materials to be used, getting quotes, coordinating shipping, and so forth.The value that they bring and reduced risk of problems is worth the premium paid for their services.
I have used both:*Panda Game Manufacturing*Grand Prix InternationalAnd I am very pleased with the results from both.ConclusionPlease, learn from my mistakes and go straight to a manufacturing liaison for the production of your games.
It will cost you more up front, but in the long run will cost less to pay them for their expertise and improved quality!




I hope you aren't giving up on Terra Prime, Michael.
It is indeed an excellent game, which I think is immediately evident on one's first play.
I know you had a few sales of it at RicCon last year just from the single game of it I ran.
If there were some way of generating the same buzz about it as you did for Eminent Domain, I think you'd end up with the same eager fan base.




I agree that TP is a good game.
I would suggest some sort of "fence" to be placed around the tiles after they are placed so that they don't slide around (like Mayfair added to the latest edition of Catan).




I'm not sure Michael knows the meaning of "give up."
Not many people could come through that with the integrity Tasty Minstral Games has and with their heads held high.
I own both Homesteaders and Terra Prime and they are great games!
I'm looking forward to Eminent Domain and hope it does well for them.
They deserve to enjoy the rewards of hard work for a change without any extra hassles!Kraken Fan #69




I constantly hear that manufacturing in China is cheaper than anywhere else (and I don't doubt it).
However, I would be interested in seeing some hard numbers comparing the manufacturing, shipping, cost of a liason and loss of damaged product to the cost of doing the same business either in the States or Germany.




Love Homesteaders, love Eminent Domain, like Terra Prime.
TP wasn't a total flop but I do agree with Michaels assessment that it suffered a lot due to the issues he stated.
It would be hard to rebuild a buzz for a game that had such a tough start out of the gates.
The big issue is whether or not its worth the risk to invest more money into a second print run, which would be necessary, if the buzz about the game was killed by the first production issues.
If I recall TMG was even on the fence about a second edition of Homesteaders for awhile and that game's buzz was much bigger than TP's.




kvenosdel wrote:Love Homesteaders, love Eminent Domain, like Terra Prime.
TP wasn't a total flop but I do agree with Michaels assessment that it suffered a lot due to the issues he stated.
It would be hard to rebuild a buzz for a game that had such a tough start out of the gates.
The big issue is whether or not its worth the risk to invest more money into a second print run, which would be necessary, if the buzz about the game was killed by the first production issues.
If I recall TMG was even on the fence about a second edition of Homesteaders for awhile and that game's buzz was much bigger than TP's.As Seth says, that is one of the things Kickstarter is for.
So, we'll see.okiedokie wrote:I constantly hear that manufacturing in China is cheaper than anywhere else (and I don't doubt it).
However, I would be interested in seeing some hard numbers comparing the manufacturing, shipping, cost of a liason and loss of damaged product to the cost of doing the same business either in the States or Germany.Without going through the USA or Germany, I do not have such numbers.
However, with the Euro to Dollar conversion (last time I checked) it was about a 50% premium to print with Ludo Fact.As with the United States, I had trouble finding printers that I had confidence in.
Which as a proud American was bothersome to me, and now I have existing manufacturing relationships.




Panda is fantastic to work with.
They're determined to ensure that games are the highest quality possible, too.
I'm getting products from them this year that *exceed* that of Ludofact, considered the #1 manufacturer in Germany!The samples I have are incredible.
I can't say enough about them.




Terra Prime deserves a second chance.
I have wanted to do a review of it for awhile but my components are so hashed up that I always thought it would be a disservice to the game instead of helping it.I haven't played it in a bit, but when we did we did a lot of substitution for the stuff I had to throw away.Please reprint!
I would buy it in a heartbeat.




I'm glad you didn't quit.
Despite the bad production of Homesteaders I had to get my own copy after my 3rd play.
I'm excited to upgrade it to the 2nd edition.Keep it up!




What things occured that took away your confidence in American printers?




okiedokie wrote:What things occured that took away your confidence in American printers?When I was looking, I could not find them.
Or rather the ones that I could find did not even take enough pride in their websites to update them from an early 90's hacked html look.
I could not afford to have that attention to detail to spill onto my games.Now I have an existing and quality working relationship with Panda Game Manufacturing and Grand Prix International.At this time, I have no need for additional printers.




UndeadViking wrote:Terra Prime deserves a second chance.
I have wanted to do a review of it for awhile but my components are so hashed up that I always thought it would be a disservice to the game instead of helping it.I haven't played it in a bit, but when we did we did a lot of substitution for the stuff I had to throw away.Please reprint!
I would buy it in a heartbeat.I agree.
It's a shame about the components and Terra Prime decent game that didn't get a fair chance.
Instead of just a reprint though, I'd like to see a "second edition" with more upgrades and stuff.
Also, the pink energy cubes have to go.
I remember the prototype had some red, translucent cubes that were really cool.
When I played Terra Prime recently I raided my copy of Dungeon Lords and used the red cubes from that for the energy cubes.




My father in law owns a printing/repro house.
I wonder how much he would need to add to get into the USA boardgame printing biz.




Sounds like the most important thing is not the quality of his printing work, but what his website looks like.




meskue wrote:UndeadViking wrote:Terra Prime deserves a second chance.
I have wanted to do a review of it for awhile but my components are so hashed up that I always thought it would be a disservice to the game instead of helping it.I haven't played it in a bit, but when we did we did a lot of substitution for the stuff I had to throw away.Please reprint!
I would buy it in a heartbeat.I agree.
It's a shame about the components and Terra Prime decent game that didn't get a fair chance.
Instead of just a reprint though, I'd like to see a "second edition" with more upgrades and stuff.
Also, the pink energy cubes have to go.
I remember the prototype had some red, translucent cubes that were really cool.
When I played Terra Prime recently I raided my copy of Dungeon Lords and used the red cubes from that for the energy cubes.Yeah, the translucent red cubes are much more cool.
I was very disappointed when I opened one of the final copies to find the pink atrocities inside.
I do have plans for a 2nd Edition of Terra Prime, with the expansion stuff included, if I can convince Mike it's worth printing for 2012!




okiedokie wrote:Sounds like the most important thing is not the quality of his printing work, but what his website looks like.
No, just that if I find a bad website.
Something that looks like it is 15 years out of date at least, then why should I have any confidence in the product?This is the year 2011.
I fully expect that I lost sales initially because the old TMG website was atrocious.
That is one of the reasons that it got updated early in this year.Not to mention at the time, many of the "hey we manufacture this game" examples looked like crap on the site and were for games I never heard of.
In the end, I found good manufacturers that I am comfortable working with, and that is hat is important to me.




okiedokie wrote:Sounds like the most important thing is not the quality of his printing work, but what his website looks like.
http://www.adsrepro.com/




FWIW, I think the components in my Terra Prime are salvageable (just gotta leave 'em out in the sun for a while longer) even though the box is kind of disgusting.Not sure yet about my Homesteaders though.




I think it is very odd that you are lamenting the fate of Terra Prime on one hand, but not even investigating the printing capabilities of printers based solely on the appearance of their website.
I guess that I do judge a book by its cover but I have also done business with: * A fencing company that doesn't have a website * A tile layer that doesn't have email * A restaurant that doesn't have a telephone * Another restaurant that doesn't have a website other the address of their business.
When I asked about these backwards ways the answer I usually got was "We don't need to do that.
We have all the business we can handle and then some."
On top of that, they do great quality work.
I guess the point I was trying to make is that you might have missed the perfect printer because the guy was more interested in printing than delving into (or paying someone to create maintain) a website.
Now if the website was full of grammatical errors, I could understand it and I also realize that you would use a website to get information.
But I think you missed the boat by dismissing them based solely on the website.
In the end, I'm glad you found a fit in a printer.




He didn't miss any boat.
The Printer would have missed the boat by not having a reasonable website.This is potentially less important for a local contractor or restaurant.




lfisher wrote:He didn't miss any boat.
The Printer would have missed the boat by not having a reasonable website.This is potentially less important for a local contractor or restaurant.Significantly.
Finding a manufacturer that will do quality work in a super targeted niche like hobby board games is like finding the right needle in a needle stack.If they have plenty of business, then good for them.
However, there was no way I would end up finding them!Tygo wrote:okiedokie wrote:Sounds like the most important thing is not the quality of his printing work, but what his website looks like.
http://www.adsrepro.com/ADS Repographics site is more than sufficient.
The site below is the exact one that I was thinking of...http://www.boardgamedesign.com/pages/main_org.htm




Michael,This is a broader manufacturing question that you may or may not have investigated: are you aware of any independent third parties that can verify that a given Chinese manufacturer (or in your case, the manufacturers utilized by a manufacturing liaison) is, to put it bluntly, not running a sweat-shop?
ie, the workers have safe working conditions, are being paid an acceptable wage for their work, etc?
As a consumer, I'd be extremely uncomfortable knowing my games (or any Chinese-manufactured merchandise that I buy) is being made by workers who are being abused or exploited.
As a publisher, I feel that it's my obligation to ensure I'm not working with manufacturers that exploit their workers.
Have you come across any ways to obtain this information, short of taking a trip to China to see for yourself?




jwarrend wrote:Michael,This is a broader manufacturing question that you may or may not have investigated: are you aware of any independent third parties that can verify that a given Chinese manufacturer (or in your case, the manufacturers utilized by a manufacturing liaison) is, to put it bluntly, not running a sweat-shop?
ie, the workers have safe working conditions, are being paid an acceptable wage for their work, etc?
As a consumer, I'd be extremely uncomfortable knowing my games (or any Chinese-manufactured merchandise that I buy) is being made by workers who are being abused or exploited.
As a publisher, I feel that it's my obligation to ensure I'm not working with manufacturers that exploit their workers.
Have you come across any ways to obtain this information, short of taking a trip to China to see for yourself?I am unaware of any such 3rd parties.




okiedokie wrote:What things occured that took away your confidence in American printers?Chad, Michael's "bad websites" comments notwithstanding, I think most publishers would love to do business with US printers if possible (including Michael, I'm sure).
But are there actually any printers in the US who are capable of doing game production to European quality standards, and who have a demonstrated reputation for having repeatedly done so?
If you know of any, it would be a great topic for a thread separate from Michael's post.
My hunch is that US printers would cost more, even with the shipping costs from China factored in, BUT the decrease in lead time and customs delays associated with shipping across the Pacific could provide a significant advantage, which, though difficult to quantify, would certainly result in goodwill from buyers.
(This would be especially true for publishers that sell via pre-order campaigns; being able to provide timely and predictable delivery will make people more likely to support such a campaign, and the 'Made in the USA' label might provide an intangible selling point as well).




I think that was what I was trying to quantify.
Here are what I see as the downsides to publishing in China: * Language barrier * Time to ship actual product * Low quality control (mold, petroleum smell in ink, bad punches, warped tiles) * Possibility of slave labor * Product piracy (there have been photos here on the geek of warehouses of bootleg copies of games) * Loss of reputation and cost of replacement due to mold (I had to get replacement parts for Duel in the Dark and my BGG 'prize' copy of Homesteaders was such a mess I just threw it away) Here are the downsides that I see to printing in the US: * Takes a long time to locate a printer that can do the work * CostI've been mulling around a game design in my head (who isn't nowadays?
), but one thing that I'm willing to die on my sword for is that it is printed in the US.
Granted, in it's current incarnation, it's only a card game, but it is essentially about a centerpiece of America and I think it would be extremely tasteless to print it overseas.




####
document number 8: 
Watch this former Xerox building in Dallas implode



Imploded Xerox building off 75 and Haskell starts to come down.


The Sunday-morning implosion of the Xerox/ACS building executed by Trammell Crow went off as planned, with a huge tan plume of smoke and a volume that viewers found to be louder than expected.

The building was imploded in preparation for a controversial Sam's Club that Trammell Crow plans to build at the corner of 75 and Haskell Avenue.
All transportation channels, including the adjacent freeway and DART trains, were shut down 30 minutes before the implosion fired, to keep the area clear.

The implosion was well-covered by local media, including helicopters.
Spectators toting umbrellas in the morning mist formed watching parties at parking lots around the periphery and whooped as if they were at a football game after the building fell.
About a dozen charges could be heard exploding, and the easternmost side of the building collapsed first.
(This slow-motion video shows it in minute detail.)

ADVERTISEMENT


Learn More

Prior to the implosion, Trammell Crow predicted that the sound level would be "similar to or less than a thunderstorm overhead."
Residents from at least a couple of miles away testified that they heard the explosion loud and clear.

The dust aftermath had viewers covering their faces as they hobbled back to their cars.

Matthew Salazar, an architect who lives nearby, went to the roof of the LA Fitness building to film a video (posted above).

"I've seen an implosion before in Atlanta, so it wasn't the first time — the loud bangs still catch you off guard, though," he said.
"I obviously can't comment on implosion from a technical level, but it looked like it went off pretty well.
They got the building to fall away from the highway."

Aside from the controversy of the site itself, Salazar said that Dallas has a reputation for implosions.
"It's not necessarily a bad thing, though," he said.
"I don't really know enough about the actual building.
But it wasn't the most beautiful thing ever built."

Implosions have an inherent appeal.
"Buildings take a long time and a lot of processes to go up and become built," he said.
"And while a demolition certainly also takes a long time to make happen, it's so instantaneous."



####
document number 9: 
My complete experience getting into FPV drone building and flying (DJI only)



My story from knowing nothing about FPV drones to my first flight.
Entire build and ideas behind it.

Firstly my previous hobby's and work do consist around being an electrician, having soldering experience and building other electronic items.
I have had no experience in building or buying any FPV drone related items.
I do own a DJI Mavic Pro drone which has nothing to do with FPV drone flying.
For the rest of the post I will refer to FPV drone builds and flying as "FPV"

This story is mainly for information purposes, to see if I can help others who might have had the same questions I had.

I first had seen FPV drones on Aliexpress, somewhere I had spent a fair bit of time on.
I had bought many electronics on there which had all come in the post and nothing was ever broken.
I still to this date, have had no real issue on there.
I had seen a drone called the Eachine X220s which is an analog camera drone.
At the time I was not even aware of the difference between analog and digital camera builds.
I began searching YouTube videos and quickly had seen videos so pixelated when flying I was immediately put off from trying to build a drone.
Pictured below is a screenshot I found of the Eachine X220s with an analog camera.
I found a video which clearly represents the issues I would not have put up with.
The VHS Tape experience was not one I was willing to accept while spending this kind of money.

Eachine X220s analog camera


Analog video on the left — digital video on the right


From seeing Analog only videos I decided not to pursue the hobby for almost a year.
I then ran into FPV videos which appeared with near clear quality in comparison like it was recorded from a phone or Gopro.
I immediately realized that they all had the DJI FPV camera system and that there is currently nothing else like it on the market.
I searched for the price of the DJI FPV googles and Airunit "AU" (camera and transmitter unit) Not to my surprise I had found that the goggles and AU were fairly expensive when taking into the consideration the cost of an Eachine X220s drone.

I knew what I must do, like all projects I build.
I began part picking, researching and building an extensive price list of parts and items I would eventually need to get into the hobby of FPV drones.
My main goal was to build something between middle and high quality.
I thought If I am going to spend money, I might as well build something worth while.
I started putting the price list together and quickly found out that the DJI goggles and air unit alone add up to a big chunk of the initial cost.
This itself didn’t bother me as much as I knew at least the goggles wouldn't get damaged as hopefully I wouldn’t break those.

I also learnt fairly on that in the FPV hobby you need spares of almost everything.
Shipping from China was long but now it has been extended even longer.
Up to 2 to 3 months in Sydney, Australia where I live.
The most used size drone build in the FPV world seemed to be 5 inch so that’s what I was going to build.
In relation to which frame I chose there was no specific reason and after asking most people it came down to frame thickness and parts availability.
I chose the frame based on accessible parts mostly.
I had found replacement parts and the frame itself to be very reasonably priced on Aliexpress in comparison to some of the unique models on other FPV shopping sites.
It cost less than half than some of those of the more expensive ones and so I decided to buy 2 full frame sets and 4 extra arms giving me plenty of spares in the event I crash and break something.
(likely) Breaking and repairing the drone appears to be a likely outcome of this hobby.
This is a photo of the drone frame.



GEPRC 5 inch Mark4 HD5 with DJI antenna holders


Next was the size of the motor and the size of the battery I wanted.
I was happy to spend a bit extra now to get the best overall FPV experience so I didn’t have to worry about upgrading later or being disappointing now.
On a 5 inch drone the common choices are 4s batteries or 6s batteries.
I went with 6s.
I was aware that more power would be hard to control, however I would accept the difficult learning curve now and try harder to make it work.
I chose the batteries in the list as they had a good deal, were recommended on the DJI FPV Facebook page and I could not find any negative feed back about them.

The motors I chose because they seemed reasonably priced and I could not find any negative feedback about them.
The Aliexpress page specifically said which version worked with the 6s battery which is the 1700kv.
I could see battery sizes were between 1050mah and 1500mah between the different brands.
This would cause a flight time variation so I knew these would be fine for me to start.
4 batteries was fine for me to get a handle on the hobby.


CNHL 6S 1100mah battery — Emax Eco Series 2306 1700kv


Next I knew I had to match a flight controller, I pretty quickly found the 4 in 1 flight controller which includes everything needed in the one unit.
I thought that was simple so I knew I would use that.
I was unsure what all the numbers and details of the flight controller meant so I began researching what all of the features did and what all of the solder pads on the controller can do.
I started to search for the most expensive flight controller and work my way cheaper to figure out what I didn’t need.
I had found an F4 flight controller and thought that was OK before someone recommended an F7 flight controller.
(F4 flight controller likely would have been fine as well) The differences being in CPU power.
The price difference was minimal and I found the one below.
It met every need I had.
The most important thing other than the F version of the flight controller was a voltage regulator "BEC" (battery eliminating circuit).
A voltage regulator that can turn the battery voltage into a usable voltage for the DJI FPV Air unit "AU" specifically.
The AU only accepts a certain voltage range and a lot of flight controllers do not have built in voltage regulators "BEC’s".
The one I chose has a 9v regulator up to 2 amps which is stated sufficient by the DJI FPV manual.
It was one less thing I needed in the build and one less thing to solder.


Diatone Mamba F722S Flight Controller 4 in 1


After this I started to research fail safe types.
A fail safe being the result of losing remote control of the drone while in flight.
Default fail safe is to drop from the sky.
This has happened to many people in video’s I have seen and it was what I was most concerned about.
I would be a new pilot, I did not want to crash my drone and at worst, completely loose the drone.
I had started to become interested in the longer ranges I could achieve which would make the fail safe mechanism even more important.
I found video’s by Joshua Bardwell (youtube) where he mentioned GPS rescue mode on Betaflight.
I recommend watching those as it was easy to understand.
I knew I had to have GPS and return to home on fail safe so I added GPS modules to the list.
Spares were cheap so I bought 2.
I was aware from the videos I would be required to take control well before it actually got home as the fail safe rescue mode expects you to regain control of the drone before it gets to land.
It appears it does not track back to the pin point location where the drone was armed from however it is certainly better than falling from the sky.

Beitian BN-220 GPS module


I began looking into what controller I was going to buy.
DJI make a controller that works with the DJI FPV Air Unit "AU".
With this I would not need an extra receiver on the drone.
It would save time and effort.
I had quickly seen people running into fail safe issues with the DJI controller builds and became unsure if the signal from the controller and the signal from the goggles were the same quality and strength.
I would have been unhappy if I lost video and it immediately crashed.
I would prefer to control the fail safe rescue mode myself.
I was also unsure how much the existing frequencies in the area like wifi or cell towers might affect the DJI radio frequencies at there strength.
I began looking at other options to weigh up the price of both and found that the TBS CROSSFIRE system was probably the high end of transmitters and receivers on the market.
It was a calculated investment but going along with my initial ideas.
I wanted to invest now so I did not have to worry later.

Again Joshua Bardwelll released a video detailing exactly how the Jumper t16 Pro controller works.
I found that I would need an added TBS CROSSFIRE attachment.
In the bellow photo in the middle is the Crossfire TX Lite and the smaller one on the right is the Crossfire TX Micro.
Both can connect to the Jumper T16 controller.
The differences between the 2 below is the larger one has an RF power of 2w and the smaller TX Micro is RF power 250mw.
250mw I knew was enough but I wanted to future proof.
I got the middle one, the TBS Crossfire TX Lite.
The TBS Crossfire Micro TX is still listed with up to 40km range averaging 15 to 20km and beyond as stated on there web page.
This alone far exceeds the distance the DJI FPV system will do but I was unsure where this hobby will take me.
At worst I am assuming the resale value is good enough to warrant the initial outlay for the Crossfire TX Lite.
The TBS group also make the Crossfire TX which is the exact same as the middle photo "Crossfire TX Lite" but includes Bluetooth.
I decided I did not need bluetooth.
The Crossfire TX Lite settings can be easily altered from inside the colour LCD screened Jumper T16 Controller.
I found a good price at the time for the Crossfire TX Lite so the version with Bluetooth did not warrant the extra cost.



Jumper T16 — TBS Crossfire TX Lite — TBS Crossfire Micro


By now I realized my price list had really started to balloon out and this hobby was not going to be cheap by any means.
I started to look into all the accessories and other parts needed to complete the drone price list.
This included a buzzer for the drone to make it easier to find if it falls somewhere close by, propellers, a battery charger, drone tools and an smart portable battery checker to ensure the batteries are correctly balanced before flying.
Balancing is to ensure that each of the 6 cells in a 6S battery are exactly the same voltage.
I have put some photos in of those items but they could likely be substituted with other items of similar description.
The DJI FPV Goggles also require a certain voltage range with 6s being too high voltage.
4s Batteries seem to be the correct voltage range.






To use the TBS Crossfire TX Lite module you need to pair it with a receiver on the drone itself that also has to be a Crossfire product.
The TBS gear is generally more expensive however it appears to be the top tier in long range gear.
I paired mine with the TBS Crossfire Nano.
Photo below.
This would enable the drone to fly even without video signal.
This would allow me to manually fail-safe the drone while it was flying or choose not to depending on the location.
The fail safe with GPS rescue mode on will likely cause it to either ascend to a predefined level like 100m or level out at the altitude it is at if higher.
I placed my fail safe on 2 switches with 1 of them a momentary switch to enable quick on and of engagement to return home.
Using Crossfire I would feel more comforted knowing that the connection in relation to the control was much stronger than the video connection.
If both the Crossfire and video link fail it would default to GPS rescue mode.

TBS Crossfire Nano





Before I had received any of these items I knew I had had to train myself to fly a drone like this.
This is nothing like flying a DJI Mavic drone and I would need to learn complete new skills.
I am accustomed to learning these type of skills as it is exactly like gaming.

I came across multiple simulators but decided to go with the DRL simulator.
It was reasonably priced and there physics were supposed to be fairly good.
I knew none would be like the real thing but training muscle memory for control of the angles and precise movements of the sticks would still be helpful.

After about 5 hours I recorded a video of my progress using Fraps.
Only allows 30 seconds recording.
I currently am sitting at 12 hours and my flying has already become smoother and I am able to go through small gaps that I would in no way risk in real life.
My method for training is to jump into the freestyle map and try to push the limits of what I think I can do.
I then attempt to redo the things I was unable to do 100s of times.
This usually en-grains something into muscle memory as the next time I jump into the simulator I am usually a small percentage better than I was the previous time.
At 10 hours I felt comfortable enough to fly my drone in an open park to test.
I would never have attempted to fly this drone without attempting a simulator first.
My first few attempts during my first hour resulted in 100s of crashes in a half hour period.
The key is commitment and this hobby requires a lot.
I had done 100s of hours of research, part picking and simulator training before even being able to fly the drone one time.

This is a price list of all of the items I bought which included extras priced in Australia Dollars "AUD".
As you can see to include all the parts and accessories needed for this build it becomes expensive quickly.
I have not added 2 memory cards in this list but likely the total will near $3000.
The GEPRC frame actually comes with 2 battery straps but I wanted better quality ones with anti slip rubber stitching.
It would probably be fine with the ones it comes.


I finally received some propellers and 128gb v30 Sandisk memory cards.
This is the drone in its final form.
It turns out the battery leads were sticking out at a bad angle which clipped the propellers during mid flight while I was testing the fail safe.
Luckily no damage.
I recorded a video of my first ever flight after the 12 hours of DRL flight simulator.


After watching the video its clear that flight in real life is far different than in the simulator the weight, balance and gravity on the drone is just different.
However the simulator at the very least prepared me to keep it balanced somewhat.

At some early stage in the video which was not captured was the fail safe and fall into the ground.
I did not realize till after the flight that the propeller had a slight dent to one of its edges which is why it was likely shaking in some of the video.

Towards the end I clip a power line as well and manage to recover before hitting the ground.
This part felt much like the simulator and I am surprised at the strength of the drone to absorb the impacts.
It also felt much faster than in the game, likely due to the risk of crashing becoming so much more real.
During the video I would say I never maxed out the throttle even once.
At some points I may have punched up to 75%.

For some reason due to the current DJI software I had trouble recording it which is why the last piece is recorded from the goggles with no sound.

In conclusion..
The excitement and risk of flying is what makes this so much fun.
It is nothing like the DRL Flight simulator game.
From the 2 crashes during my first flights I damaged 1 propeller and 1 JST-XH balance battery connector.
These are cheap and easily replaced.
On to practicing.

Thanks.



####
document number 10: 
AU students react to ongoing protests in Hong Kong


Screenshot from YouTube

AU sophomore Casey Chambers holds up a Hong Kong protest sign during a gaming livestream on Oct.
8


Three AU students made headlines for their Hong Kong protest gone viral during a

livestream

of an online video game tournament on Oct.
8.

AU students’ reactions to this livestream, as well as to the ongoing protests in Hong Kong, have been varied.
Several students from China said that there is a spectrum of opinions across campus on the topic, from wholehearted support to cautious hesitation.

"I’m not sure everyone involved knows the history of Hong Kong or the background between Hong Kong and China, but they want to say ‘free Hong Kong’ before they have all the knowledge," said Jiatong Ban, a sophomore in the School of International Service from Hebei, China.

Protests in Hong Kong

have been ongoing since June, in reaction to the proposed bill that would allow for criminal suspects from Hong Kong to be extradited to mainland China.
The bill has been suspended, but protests have persisted.

The political movement has made its way into the gaming world, where a

Hearthstone player was suspended

for a protest in support of Hong Kong during his victory interview.
His protest landed him in hot water with the gaming company Blizzard, which suspended him and revoked all prize money.

At the center of backlash towards Blizzard were three AU student gamers: Casey Chambers, Corwin Dark and their teammate who prefers to go by his online name, TJammer.
During their livestream, the players held up a sign that read "Free Hong Kong, Boycott Blizz."
The sign was placed directly in front of the camera for thousands of viewers to see.

"Cory next to me had the sign under the table," said Chambers, a sophomore in SIS.
"He handed it to me when we realized the game was over."

He recalled feeling an obligation to make this statement.
"If they’re going to go out on the street and risk arrest and being beaten by the police, at the very minimum what three American college students can do is protest on a webcam."

He encouraged other AU students to join the movement.
"Find what protest is best for you … Do what you can do," he said.

Ban said that she sees why AU students would want to get involved with the protests.
"Not all Hong Kong protestors are wrong, I know there are some reasons they’d like to stand up for their rights," Ban said.

Xueyan Xia, a sophomore from Anhui, China studying film and media, had similar thoughts.
She acknowledged an understanding of the desire to protest, but also a hesitation to assume the facts of the situation.

"Freedom of press is not really a thing in China, that’s a fact and we can't deny that," Xia said.
"In the mainland-Chinese newspapers, they report police officers getting injured by protestors, but in the newspapers here they say the protestors are the ones getting badly injured.
They are totally opposite to each other."

Both students compared the Hong Kong protests to the 1989 Tiananmen Square incident.
Ban said that learning about this incident in her Chinese Politics and Foreign Policy class at AU made her more sympathetic towards the protestors.

"I started to see the Hong Kong issue from a new way, why the protesters wanted to stand up and say ‘Free Hong Kong,’" Ban said.

Xia said that both incidents have murky details with differing narratives.

"It doesn’t appear in the textbooks, but we had heard about it from elders who had actually been in that event," Xia said.
"It’s a totally different version of the story compared to the American one."

Both Ban and Xia emphasized their recognition for other students rights to stand with the Hong Kong protestors, but also urged for a balance and acknowledgment that not all the facts of the situation are present.

"I just ask them to research the history and deeper things between Hong Kong and mainland China," Ban said.

kcartelli@theeagleonline.com


More from The Eagle






####
document number 11: 
My First 3D Print using Fusion360


With no prior experience in Fusion360, I was pretty impressed with the fact I had a 3D printed model at hand within a day of opening up the software.
A big thanks to HoneyPoint3D for such an amazing course and I am certainly looking forward to completing the next 13 hours of training and sharing my journey with you all.


"Fusion 360 is the first 3D CAD, CAM and CAE tool of its kind.
It connects your entire product development process in a single cloud-based platform that works on both Mac and PC".
Autodesk


Last week we welcomed HoneyPoint3D into the PrintLab community.
Their award-winning online courses have been tried and tested in the market and we couldn’t wait to get going with our own training.
Today I embarked on my own journey with Fusion360, guided by HoneyPoint3D’s online course that consists of 15+ hours of instructional video.
Here’s how it went:

I began the course this morning and have so far completed around 2 hours’ worth of training.
The initial sections of the course talked me through an in-depth overview of Fusion360 along with how it works and the different environments within the software.
From surface modelling and sculpting to rendering, animation and much more, I was truly shocked at how much Fusion360 can actually do – not to mention it’s free for students, educators and startups!

I finished the morning off with some targeted videos, a section based on answering specific questions such as how to extrude a 3D object from a sketch and it was at this point that I decided to pause the course and see if I could create a simple household item that I could then 3D print today.


I set my sights on designing a phone holder and as advised by Nick Kloski, co-founder of HoneyPoint3D, I started to design with pen and paper.
Using some measurements and a simple line drawing, I now had an idea that I could turn into reality with Fusion360… hopefully!

Using the knowledge I gained in the class about the sketch environment, I drew out my idea in 2 dimensions.
Once my initial sketch was complete, I went to the "reference" section of the HoneyPoint3D class to learn how to apply dimensions and fillets (rounding parts), here’s how the design looked at this point.


Now it was time to extrude the sketch to create a 3D model.
This was simply a case of selecting the extrude tool and typing in the distance required.
Below is the extruded model, which I then sent over to Nick Kloski, who in turn set me the task of cutting a hole in the model to fit the phone charger.


So back to the class I went where I learnt how to sketch on a surface and use it as a cutting tool.
Here’s the final model.
The image was created in the "render" environment, which allows you to set various material, light and background settings.


Now to truly bring the model to life, I exported the STL and set the 3D print going on our trusty Ultimaker 3D printer with Innofil3D PRO1 filament.
Using PRO1 allowed us to print at 120mm/s, which meant we’d have the finished model within just 2 hours.
Check out this video where we compared PRO1 to regular PLA.


With no prior experience in Fusion360, I was pretty impressed with the fact I had a 3D printed model at hand within a day of opening up the software.
A big thanks to HoneyPoint3D for such an amazing course and I am certainly looking forward to completing the next 13 hours of training and sharing my journey with you all.

If you want to join me on the Fusion360 journey, here’s a link to HoneyPoint3D’s profile page where you can learn more and get enrolled: http://bit.ly/2fUsdt9.
Don’t forget to check out the Fusion360 promo video in the link to get a glimpse of the online training course.

Written by Jason Yeung



####
document number 12: 
Receiving playtest feedback: Unpub and more


I have three stories about receiving game feedback to share today: Two Unpubs and one blind playtest.

Unpub 3 in Delaware: Chaos Alchemy


I learned last week, to my surprise, that my first game, Chaos Alchemy, was available to try at Unpub 3 this past January in Delaware.
As you may know, Game Salute is in the process of getting ready to publish Chaos Alchemy, and they were apparently at Unpub 3 with games in tow, including mine.
I had no idea it had been available there until this past week, when John Moller, the Unpub coordinator, mentioned that he had some feedback forms from Chaos Alchemy from that event.
How cool!









There were only two forms, but the players seemed to get the game easily and to have a good time with it.
My favorite was the place on the second form where the player mentioned liking the game, and listed "Random / dice games" as his/her least favorite type of games.
If you hate random/dice games and you still enjoyed Chaos Alchemy (which is very random and uses lots of dice), then it’s a good game.

Blind playtest feedback: Alchemy Bazaar

I’m not going into a lot of detail on this one, but I sent a copy of Alchemy Bazaar to a friend in Florida for blind playtesting.
That is, I sent a copy of the game with the rules and all of the components and asked my friend to try it with a group, without me providing any input beyond the rules as written.


There’s no easy way to put this; it didn’t go well.
When I’ve taught the game in person, it’s been a big hit all around.
But the blind playtest just didn’t work, and it was almost entirely because of the rules.
Lesson learned: I need to get much, much better at writing rules.
I’m working hard on this, and I’m confident that I’ll get the rules to where they need to be.
If I have any blog readers who are interested in giving my updated rules a read-through and providing feedback, let me know in the comments!
I’d love the extra set of eyes on the rules.

Unpub Mini Enchanted Grounds: Alchemy Bazaar

The most fun bit of playtest feedback I’ve gotten recently at Unpub Mini Enchanted Grounds, which was an event this past Saturday at my friendly local game store.
I was basically the organizer of the event, as well as a demonstrator of a game.
We had six games going at a time: five designers who were there for the whole six hours, and a pair of designers who traded off the first six hours and the last six hours (so, a total of seven games).

Things started off a bit slowly, and I played the role of host, talking to people who came into the store and shepherding them to games that they would likely enjoy based on their preferences.
Eventually I got to start demoing Alchemy Bazaar, and had the chance to run a total of three games.

Alchemy Bazaar in action at Unpub Mini.
Note the game board for my super-rough game Everest in the foreground.


Two of those games were won by a guy who had first tried the game the week before at Tabletop Game Day.
He liked it so much that he came back this week and played it twice more.
Definitely a good sign!

The feedback forms from this event were very positive.
One of the games ran a bit longer than I would have liked, and that was reflected in one of the feedback forms, but that’s fine; I can tweak the length easily enough.

Unpub Mini was a rousing success for all involved, I think.
Lots of players came through the store to play lots of games.
Some, like Mighty Heroes and the Monster Zone, were very polished in terms of production values and will soon be on Kickstarter.
Others, like my own Alchemy Bazaar, were in earlier prototype stages, but still complete games.
I didn’t get a chance to actually play any of the other games, but I at least got to talk to the designers and learn how the games work.

Frankly, I’m just happy to have met some other local board game designers!
I think we’ll be getting together again in the not-too-distant future.

Dealing with feedback

Through this process, I’ve learned some lessons about productively dealing with playtest feedback.
The positive feedback is useful because it tells you what elements of the game are working, so that you can be careful not to change those too much.
The negative feedback is even more useful because it tells you where you need to focus your efforts.
I’ll admit that I took the negative feedback hard and was feeling pretty down, but I eventually buckled down and fixed what was broken (or at least worked hard to fix it; I don’t know how fixed it is yet).

So, through it all I think I’m continuing to grow as a game designer.
That’s the hope, anyway!

Michael Iachini, the OnlineDM



####
document number 13: 
Monster Keep — FIRST four (4) Multiplayer test


Finally got around to printing and cutting more cards for a four (4) Multiplayer game...
The Keep will be 7 x 7 and feature the Nexus card for the Human Race ("Kingdom of Calahan").

I'm just about ready to start, all I need to do is shuffle the 4 Micro Decks and then get ready to START the game.

I will post news about the test and see if the game is STILL FUN with 4 players (as opposed to only 2 players).

Keep you all posted...!


So far I'm at 50% of the two (2) first rounds (out of 12).
And it's been a bit "tough" ... but still very engaging.
It's a rather simple game in which you really TRY "not to make mistakes" and have your opponent's take you down because of area control...

Still the score is even at 50 MPs a piece.
No scoring as per the start of the match!

More to come ... in addition to my own personal feedback and what I think of the game... (With 4 players)


I didn't realize how HARD it was going to be to playtest a 4 Player game.
There is so much going on with the Keep...
Sometimes you miss a possibility or chance to do more damage (by placing cards in different positions).

Also unlike a two (2) Player game, it sort of encourages you to make the BEST possible move, ignoring the players and their scores.
Which means one player can take more damage (after 3 rounds the score is: 44, 41, 24 and 38).
Player #1 is in the lead but Player #3 has more than HALF his MPs lost...

I will continue the game until the END...
But it's going to take a WHILE.

I'll report back as soon as there is more exciting moves or attacks!


Score = 36, 41, 10 and 14.
Almost HALF way through the game... And it's been rather BRUTAL for Player #3 and #4.
The victory is still not decided but most probably either Player #1 or #2!

One thing that I have concluded is this: It's NOT a KIDS game!

It seems so freaken SIMPLE...
But there is so much going on with the calculations, determining the best position, playing the right card at the most opportunistic moment, checking what abilities can apply in what circumstances...

And it's "Customizable" too!

Definitely for an ADULT/MILLENNIAL crowd for sure.
In a way that's good but in another way it's not as appealing.
Not the gameplay ... which is unique and solid.
It's just SO STRATEGIC ...
I would probably have to remove "Abilities" and maybe then KIDS could learn to play (starting with 2 Player games and then moving on to 4 Player matches).
But "Abilities" are a BIG part about what makes the cards themselves unique from each other...

I still have to figure out how to EXPLAIN or TEACH the game, also!


I personally like strategic games, so it would be a plus for me!
You can always make a "kids version" later, if you're that worried about it.
Any play-testers needed anytime?
We would love to check it out sometime :)

-Austin



MAR

wrote:

I personally like strategic games, so it would be a plus for me!
You can always make a "kids version" later, if you're that worried about it.
Any play-testers needed anytime?
We would love to check it out sometime :)

Sent you a PM regarding the game.
It's summer, things are slower!
(LOL) No but I really appreciate your offer and may take you up on it.
Right now the real issue is the "rulebook" and finalizing my own 2 Player tests (with the latest changes).
But it so freaken HOT, that the cards are sticking together!
(No seriously)

I'll let you know once the design is a bit "firmer".
Cheers!


So far I have "created" FIVE (5) Types of Play.
Here they are:


Dominance

= Each player's deck must have one color as the dominant color.


Race wars

= Each player's deck may only have one color of cards.


Equalizer

= Each player's deck must have two (2) colors, six (6) of each.


Blockade

= Can only use entire blocks, no mixing cards in the same block.


Carbon

= Each player has the same identical deck (same 12 cards).



These play styles have got to do with customizing your twelve (12) card Micro Deck.
I'm trying to be as "innovative" with the game because it's such a "small" game with so much "depth"!



####
document number 14: 
Hola Bonjour – From Paris to Barcelona with Renfe-SNCF high speed train


It all starts with a Twitter Game of Renfe-SNCF en Coopération.
The price is a first-class round-trip ticket for a direct connection with the high-speed train.

Numerous trains operate between 21 cities in the two countries France and Spain.
Hence in our opinion, the successful slogan "Hola Bonjour".


We are spoiled for choice to find the ideal destination from the various connections of the Renfe-SNCF high speed train.
Since Paris is the closest station to us, the starting point is already clear.

A year earlier we had visited Barcelona and Madrid, but unfortunately, we had no time for places like Segovia.
So we decide for a ticket from Paris to Barcelona to continue our Spain discovery tour.

At the Gare de Lyon in Paris, we receive a call from Coralie Gilles, responsible for communication at Renfe-SNCF in cooperation, in France.
To our surprise, Coralie and her colleague Caroline are at the station.


Safety is paramount at the station in Paris and filming is not allowed.
However, Coralie has arranged everything in advance with the person in charge of Communications and Marketing at the Gare de Lyon, who also comes past.
So, this time, we have the official permission to film this great and beautiful building.

Coralie and Caroline accompany us to the platform and wish us a good journey.
Our high-speed train leaves on schedule.

The line between Paris and Barcelona is operated by a Euroduplex.
This double-decker high-speed train has 8 carriages, thereof 3 First class, 5 Second class, and a restaurant carriage.

On the route from Paris to Barcelona, it can travel at 320 km/h.
We have two seats on the upper floor and can enjoy the passing scenery.

Unfortunately, the weather is not as we would have desired.
The sun breaks through, just before we reach the Mediterranean.
But in the meantime, we can pass the time working on the laptop.
From time to time, one can stretch the legs and visit the board restaurants.

We can highly recommend a trip with a Renfe-SNCF high speed train.
Unlike the aircraft, we did not have any problems with the baggage.
Everybody can take along up to three pieces of luggage.
You might even travel with your bike free of charge.
Also pets under 10kg are allowed, and so our fellow travelers are accompanied by a cat.

From a cost perspective, it is cheaper to travel by train than to go by car or plane.
However, the biggest advantage is that you will reach your destination stress-free and relaxed.

After a little more than 6 hours, we reach the station Barcelona Sants punctual to the minute.

Disclosure: We would like to take this opportunity to thank Renfe-SNCF en Coopération for the journey.
All impressions and opinions are our own.


Text, photos and video: Copyright © myVideoMedia



####
document number 15: 
I Got Divorced on a Conference Call Because of Coronavirus


A three-way call is not how I imagined my marriage ending.


I imagine that for some people, getting divorced over the phone might seem like a best-case scenario.
You don’t have to take a day off work to go to court, don’t have to see your ex.
It’s convenient, and takes a total of about 10 minutes.

But I’m mourning the divorce I thought I would have.
I moved out of what the state of Massachusetts would call my "marital home" on September 1, 2019, before the world turned upside-down.
My ex-husband and I are on great terms: We are getting divorced because I'm gay, not because we hate each other, and we have gone through this entire process together.

Last fall, we met with a mediator — not a lawyer — to draw up our divorce and custody agreement.
We drove to the mediator’s office together.
We held hands as she asked us questions about our finances, about living arrangements, about health insurance.
We cried as we told her how we planned to divide up our assets.
We told each other we loved each other after it was over.
It was bittersweet.
When it came time for him to buy our house from me, we did the same, and walked out of the Registry of Deeds holding hands.

I thought the final step would be done together, too.
That we could go in front of a judge, hold hands, and walk out of the courtroom together — divorced, but together as co-parents embarking on this next phase of our lives.

But then the coronavirus pandemic hit.
At first, we were worried the hearing would be continued indefinitely and we would be stuck in this divorced-but-not-really limbo.
Which, all things considered, would have been fine.
There are much more important things right now than my divorce hearing, which is not life-or-death.
Waiting might have been an annoyance, but an understandable and manageable one.

But then, days after being told our hearing would be delayed another month (for the second time) we were told we could request a video or teleconference because our divorce was non-contested.
The hearing would still happen — it would just be over the phone.

And so, I got divorced on a three-way phone call in our respective quarantine locations.
It felt cold and impersonal.
I couldn’t see him or hug him.
I didn’t realize how much it had meant to be able to walk the final steps of our divorce together until that option was taken from me.

When it was unclear how long-term this pandemic would be, family courts continued hearings for all non-emergency matters, which included divorce hearings.
The websites had announcements about courts reopening in a few weeks or a month, dates which kept getting pushed back until it became necessary to find other solutions.

While courts were closed, custody agreements were nearly impossible for judges to enforce, causing what one parent told

the New York Post

was an "anarchy" around shared custody for some divorced couples.
As the weeks have gone on, more and more municipalities are offering the option of phone or video hearings, including for federal criminal trials.
Michigan has an entire page on their website dedicated to using Zoom for virtual hearings and a call to expand remote proceedings (though in South Florida, one lawyer had to be instructed by a judge to wear a shirt during Zoom hearings).
In Southern New York, judges may continue to hold hearings at their discretion, but they are "strongly encouraged" to do so by phone or video conference, according to a court order.
People are getting married on Zoom, and Philadelphia and the state of New York, are allowing people to apply for virtual marriage licenses.

Our hearing was an hour later than scheduled, because even while doing hearings over the phone, the court can’t seem to run on time.
The judge asked us to raise our right hand and swear to tell the truth, which I did in my empty living room, with no witnesses to confirm whether I’d done it or not.

"On or about July 2019, was there an irretrievable breakdown of the marriage?"
the judge asked.

"Yes," my husband’s voice said.

"Does it continue to this day?"
she asked.

"Is there any chance of reconciliation?"

I could hear the sadness in his voice through the phone, and it was at that point that I was unable to contain my own.
The tears came down.
I cried for the end of my marriage, for the impersonal way it was happening, for the history we had together that we were closing the book on.
Before we hung up, the judge told us the divorce would be final in 120 days; there was nothing else for either of us to do on our end.
All that was left was a waiting game.

After it was over, we called each other on the phone.
I’d gotten dressed up for the occasion, as if I were really going to court: my favorite cheetah-covered emerald green jumpsuit, big gold hoops, long gold pendant necklace.
I sent him a photo of my outfit.
He’d pulled out one of his coveted Cuban cigars, saved only for special occasions.
He sent me a photo of him smoking it.

We talked for almost an hour, about everything and nothing.
Throughout the divorce process and the pandemic, our conversations had become rote.
We talked logistics, whether about finances or hearings or kid stuff.
We talked schedules, about pickups and drop offs and paperwork.
We had been seeing each other several times per week when we exchanged the kids.

But the two of us hadn’t really connected.
We’d talked without talking.
And so, after our divorce hearing, that’s what we did.
He told me about work, about his new relationship, about how he was doing.
I told him about how stressed I was about money, about my new partner, about how I was feeling.
And at the end of the call, we said, "I love you" before we hung up the phone.

VIDEO: Love in the Time of Coronavirus — Single in Quarantine



Our physical distance hadn’t actually stopped us from doing the last step of our divorce process together, even if it didn’t happen the way I thought it would.
We did it together, from our separate homes.
Our mutual presence was indicated by the sound of our voices, through which our emotions registered.
And at the end of it all, we didn’t sit down for a cup of coffee or hold hands, but we found a way to connect nonetheless.

I recognize that my divorce is not representative of everyone’s.
Not everyone has an amicable separation.
Some people are leaving abusive situations, others are fleeing hostile ones — or unable to do either.
But not all divorces are contentious.
Not all divorces happen because people stop loving each other.
Sometimes, a divorce happens

because

two people love each other.
Mine is an example of that.
We never needed a courtroom for that to be true.

The next morning, my husband came by to drop off the kids.
He brought me a card.
"We did it!"
the inside read.
"Love, your EX-husband."

The coronavirus pandemic is unfolding in real time, and guidelines change by the minute.
We promise to give you the latest information at time of publishing, but please refer to the CDC and WHO for updates.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = develop treatment
document number 1: 
The Real Story of Remdesivir


Taxpayers are spending at least $70.5 million to develop the drug

Remdesivir, an experimental COVID-19 treatment, has benefited significantly from public funding.
Based off publicly available data, Public Citizen estimates that taxpayers are contributing at least $70.5 million to develop remdesivir.
[1] The real number is likely higher.
We trace the story below.

Federal scientists helped discover remdesivir’s potential.

(Taxpayer support: at least $34.5 million)


In 2015, federal scientists screened a thousand compounds from a Gilead library in search of a molecule to target Ebola virus.
After identifying a remdesivir precursor, U.S. Army scientists worked with the corporation to "refine, develop and evaluate the compound.
"[2] The government partnership was "critical to the successful identification of [remdesivir].
"[3] A team led by federal scientists found that remdesivir was active against coronaviruses, "suggesting the potential for wider medical use.
"[4]

In addition to providing in-kind support, the Department of Defense funded Gilead directly.
A 2017 government report notes that DOD "is cost sharing with Gilead Biosciences [sic] for continued development of this product.
"[5] So far, DOD has given Gilead $34.5 million.
[6] The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has also led two Ebola remdesivir trials, likely supported by millions of taxpayer dollars.
[7] This laid the groundwork for the current response.

The NIH funded university researchers to study remdesivir’s effects against coronaviruses.

(Taxpayer support: at least $6 million)


As part of its nearly $700 million investment in coronavirus research, the NIH awarded University of North Carolina researchers a $6 million grant to accelerate the development of remdesivir.
[8] NIH researchers also made significant advances.
Federal scientists found that remdesivir could reduce lung damage in monkeys with an earlier coronavirus, as well as the new coronavirus.
[9]

National governments are running COVID-19 remdesivir clinical trials.

(Taxpayer support: at least $30 million)


Public funding is supporting many clinical trials across the world.
The World Health Organization, a European consortium, and Chinese public institutions all began remdesivir trials.
[10] In the U.S., the NIH is running a trial that will cost at least $30 million this fiscal year alone.
[11] Taxpayers are taking significant risk.
If remdesivir proves safe and effective, they should not have to pay twice.

[1] We draw on Knowledge Ecology International’s Briefing Note prepared by Kathryn Ardizzone, https://www.keionline.org/BN-2020-1

[2] https://www.usamriid.army.mil/press_releases/Travis%20ID%20Week%20FINAL.pdf

[3] Dustin Siegel et al., Discovery and Synthesis of GS-5734 for the Treatment of Ebola and Emerging Viruses, J Med Chem (2017).

[4] HHS, Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise Strategy and Implementation Plan (2017)

[5]

Id.


[6] OTA: W911QY1690001 ($33.3 million) and W911QY1630001 ($1.2 million).

[7] NCT03719586 and NCT02818582

[8] Public Citizen, Blind Spot (2020), https://www.citizen.org/article/blind-spot/.
For remdesivir specifically, see https://tinyurl.com/yd2ckoaf.
The NIH also awarded university researchers a $37.5 million grant to help develop treatments for coronaviruses, including remdesivir, among other projects.
https://tinyurl.com/ybyq4grb.

[9] https://tinyurl.com/sl2q638 and https://tinyurl.com/y9oartxq

[10] SOLIDARITY, INSERM (2020-000936-23), Chinese studies (NCT04252664, NCT04257656.)

[11] https://tinyurl.com/yakvqcja (NIH email correspondence with Wall Street Journal reporter).



####
document number 2: 
Don's Story


INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE


After walking down his driveway to pick up the newspaper one morning, Don was so out of breath that he needed to rest before returning home.
An avid skier since his teens, Don knew the walk should have been easy compared to racing down steep and icy slopes.
Something was wrong.


Don — Temple Health patient diagnosed with nonspecific interstitial pneumonia


"I’ve been healthy my whole life," says Don.
"For 70 years I was fine, and then suddenly I couldn’t go up the stairs or shower without losing my breath.
I also started coughing."

Unable to receive a clear diagnosis from his local pulmonologist, Don’s health remained in question for another year.
He and his wife, Marianne, knew the reputation of Temple Health through their ads.
They decided it was "time to go to a teaching hospital" where a focus on education and research might provide an answer.

Receiving a Diagnosis


At the Temple Lung Center, Don’s new doctor ran several tests, including a high-resolution CT scan of the chest.
The scan revealed that Don had a pattern of lung injury known as nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), a type of interstitial lung disease that affects the tissue around the lungs, this rare disorder is most common in women.
The cause of NSIP is unknown.

Temple’s Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) Program uses a multidisciplinary approach to diagnose and treat patients with ILD.
A team of doctors uses noninvasive, high-resolution imaging to diagnose most patients, which often allows for an accurate diagnosis without need for an invasive lung biopsy.

To have my case presented, and then have everyone thinking about it and giving their expert opinions is a fantastic benefit.

- Don


Benefiting from Treatment Research


For treatment, Don’s doctor and pharmacist collaborated to develop a drug therapy plan with the steroid Prednisone.
A few months later, Don was able to slowly wean off Prednisone and manage his disease with Mycophenolate Mofetil, an immunosuppressive drug typically used by patients who receive a lung transplant.

During this time, Temple’s ILD Program was carrying out an observational study to determine which patients may benefit most from this medication.
Don’s case benefited from early results of this research.

Back to Enjoying Life



Don with his granddaughter, Kaylin


Today, Don’s cough and breathing are under control and he is back to hitting the slopes.
He recently enjoyed a family trip to Vermont where he introduced the sport to his granddaughter, Kaylin.

"My wife and I have been skiing our whole lives.
[After my diagnosis], I never thought I’d be able to do it again," shares Don.
"Now, I get to ski again and share it with my grandchildren!
I owe it all to Temple."

Helpful Resources


Looking for more information?



####
document number 3: 
President Obama Signs New EpiPen Law To Protect Children with Asthma and Severe Allergies, And Help Their Families To Breathe Easier


President Barack Obama signs H.R. 2094, the School Access to Emergency Epinephrine Act, during a signing ceremony in the Oval Office, Nov.
13, 2013.
(Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)


Today in the Oval Office, President Obama signed into law the School Access to Emergency Epinephrine Act, which will encourage schools to plan for severe asthma attacks and allergic reactions, and provide millions of families with greater peace of mind.

The law makes an important change to the Children’s Asthma Treatment Grants Program and other federal asthma programs, which authorizes the Department of Health and Human Services to give funding preferences to states for asthma-treatment grants if they: maintain an emergency supply of epinephrine (EpiPens), if they permit trained personnel of the school to administer epinephrine, and if they develop a plan for ensuring trained personnel are available to administer epinephrine during all hours of the school day.

The President knows in signing this new law, that the anxiety felt by millions of parents, every time their child with asthma or severe allergies heads into school, will begin to fade.
An estimated 9.5% of American children suffer from asthma, and between 4 and 6% of children are affected by food allergies, either of which can strike in an instant, and have life threatening consequences.
But the significance of this threat can be dramatically reduced as more schools respond to this law, and begin to prepare for these emergencies.

It is a promising day for millions of children and families who live life just one mishap away from catastrophe.
As states and schools begin to update and upgrade their response capacity, we will all learn to breathe a little easier.



####
document number 4: 
Gilead’s remdesivir enters China phase III trial to fight coronavirus


Man wearing mask, receiving coronavirus vaccine


BEIJING – China will kickstart a phase III trial Feb.
3 to determine whether patients with 2019-nCoV can be treated with Gilead Sciences Inc.
’s NUC inhibitor, remdesivir, which was originally developed for Ebola, four days after a U.S. patient was said to have recovered by using the drug candidate.

The study, expected to be completed on April 27, is a phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of remdesivir in hospitalized adult patients with mild and moderate 2019-nCoV infections.
It will enroll 270 patients and be carried out in the China-Japan Friendship Hospital in Beijing.

Gilead said it is expediting the laboratory testing of remdesivir against 2019-nCoV samples and working with the Chinese authorities.

Remdesivir is being developed by the U.S. company as a monophosphoramidate prodrug of code GS-441524 that targets viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
It was intended to be an intravenous treatment for Ebola, but it also showed potential against coronavirus and Nipah virus infections.

Remdesivir is yet to be approved anywhere globally and has not been demonstrated to be safe or effective for any use.
However, a paper in

The New England Journal of Medicine

published Jan.
31 suggested there was a possibility of using the drug candidate to help contain the deadly 2019-nCoV virus, which has killed 361 people so far.

On Jan 26, a 35-year-old patient in the U.S. with 2019-nCoV received remdesivir, a week after he was admitted to the hospital, according to reports.
The following day, his fever went down from 39.4 degrees Celsius to 37.3 degrees Celsius, oxygen saturation values improved to 94% to 96%, and the previous bilateral lower-lobe rales were no longer present.

Five days after being treated with remdesivir, he was said to be afebrile, with all symptoms resolved except for his cough, which was getting better.

The encouraging result prompted Gilead and the Chinese authorities to move the phase III trial ahead and expand it to a lot more patients who need treatment desperately.

"Remdesivir is not a well-proven drug in either the U.S. or China," He Gongxin, former chief representative of the Shanghai office at Gilead, told

BioWorld

.
"Since 2019-nCoV is a new virus, we’ll just try it.
There are good scientific reasons for us to believe it could be safe and efficacious.

"I believe this is the best chance we have for now," He added.

In October 2015, a phase I study that evaluated the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of remdesivir in healthy volunteers demonstrated promising results and supported further clinical studies.

The drug candidate has been evaluated in preclinical studies for the potential treatment of coronavirus infection.

"Remdesivir has demonstrated in vitro and in vivo activity in animal models against the viral pathogens MERS and SARS, which are coronaviruses that are structurally similar to 2019-nCoV," said Gilead’s chief medical officer Merdad Parsey.

In mice, remdesivir significantly decreased Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)-coronavirus lung viral loads and improved respiratory function and disease outcomes, whereas lopinavir/ritonavir plus IFN-beta only improved respiratory function, according to the in vivo data presented at the 32nd International Conference on Antiviral Research in Baltimore in May 2019.

The in vitro data presented at the same conference in May 2017 showed that remdesivir was highly active against multiple coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), MERS and murine hepatitis with EC50 in the range of 0.02-0.07 mM, and exhibited selectivity indexes of 135 to 1,600 in human and murine cell lines.

As for now, it remains to be seen if there is antiviral data for remdesivir that show activity against 2019-nCoV.

"The U.S. patient’s conditions improved significantly, but that’s all we have," He told

BioWorld

.
"Once the clinical trial completes in April, the conclusion will be clear."

He added the end of April would likely be the earliest point to tell if remdesivir works, as the clinical trial cannot go any faster.
The treatment itself will take nine days, and the data analysis will also take time.

As of Feb 3., 17,242 people are confirmed to be infected and 361 have died.
The numbers have skyrocketed over the past few weeks.

Due to the enormous pressure to curb the spread of 2019-nCoV, remdesivir could be the first drug used on Chinese patients under the compassionate use program, which was written into China’s Drug Administration Law in August 2019.
The U.S. allowed remdesivir to be used on the 35-year-old patient on a compassionate basis.

Remdesivir had already been used on the same basis on a patient in the U.K. infected with Ebola in October 2015.

Global efforts

Currently, there are more than 40 drugs under development globally to fight the coronavirus infection, and efforts are concentrated on SARS and MERS.
Among the drug candidates, 65% are against MERS and 25% against SARS.

The global pipeline will see two new drug candidates targeting the novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV, which will be developed by Moderna Therapeutics Inc.
as an mRNA vaccine and Inovio Pharmaceutical Inc.
as INO-4800.

Also joining the R efforts are Johnson Johnson, Novavax Inc., Vir Biotechnology Inc., Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Wuxi Biologics Cayman Inc., Stemirna Therapeutics Co.
Ltd., Bravovax Co. and Geovax Labs Inc.
Ltd.

In academia, Hong Kong researchers led by microbiologist Yuen Kwok-yung have made progress in developing a vaccine for 2019-nCoV by modifying an influenza vaccine with a part of the surface antigen of the coronavirus.
The University of Queensland (UQ) in Australia is also aiming to develop one.

HIV drugs also play a part.

Lopinavir/ritonavir, a HIV-1 protease inhibitor marketed by Abbvie in 2000, will be investigated in a clinical trial in China for 2019-nCoV.
Ascletis Pharma Inc.
has also filed with regulators to include its ritonavir and ASC09 fixed-dose combination for emergency use.
The company said Feb.
3 it is in talks with medical researchers to assist them in initiating clinical trials.

No Comments



####
document number 5: 
What to expect from Pre-adoption Psychological Evaluations



Generally, people find it very daunting to visit a psychologist in order to have a psychological evaluation.
This fear increases when the couple is planning to adopt a child especially after more than a few unsuccessful attempts to conceive a child of their own.
They might be going through severe frustration and dilemma plus are not ready to take any chance that would not allow them to have a child.
However, having pre-adoption psychological evaluation is very imperative for the healthy upbringing of the child.
Furthermore, it helps the potential adoptive parents to give their best in the future.
Hence, it is a mandatory step of international adoption process.

For every country, the requirements might differ but the process of pre-adoption psychological testing remains the same.
The length of time for pre-adoption psychological evaluation interview is approximately three to four hours.
The interview is divided into two main segments.
The first hour is dedicated to the one-to-one interview between potential adoptive parents and the psychologist.
Typically, we see each parent separately and then together as a couple.
The last two hours are reserved for the true or false assessment known as Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 or the MMPI-2.

Interview The key reason of carrying out an interview is to develop an accurate history.
We discuss individual history as well as the history of the couple.
We also like to review the Home Study Report (HSR) if it has been completed.
The clinical interview is mandatory because it would be unethical if the psychologist interprets the result of the MMPI-2 without having required conversation with parents-to-be.

MMPI-2 Assessment This psychopathology assessment is composed of 567 sensitive true or false questions.
The couple planning to adopt child is requested to conduct the test in the psychologist’s office.
It is not a general knowledge or education based quiz.
For this, one does not have to study.
It requires the respondent to select the best possible answer according to their preference.
Questions are associated with one’s encounter with anxiety, depression, or any other mental disorder.
It is normal to feel anxious while attempting the assessment, particularly when one comes across the questions which do not seem to be related to the adoption procedure.
The results are then discussed in the psychological report.

What happens after the interview and MMPI-2 test?
Right after the detailed interview plus pre-adoption MMPI-2 assessment, the psychologist composes one letter according to the country’s requirements.
A majority of agencies give a sample letter and few of them might also request for a review of the report before submission.
It generally takes two to three weeks for the final report to be completed.
During the interview and the test, be yourself and know that it is normal to feel a little anxious.
It is absolutely fine to open up in front of the psychologist regarding your previous psychological issues and personal history.

At Dr. Angela Reiter Associates in Eastchester, NY, we make the Pre-Adoption Evaluation as seamless as possible and are sensitive to the concerns and issues that a pre-adoptive couple or individual may have experienced in the past.
Issues such as past psychological treatment for anxiety, loss of a pregnancy, and difficulty conceiving are frequently encountered and are treated with understanding and compassion.
We know that the adoption process is stressful and will assist you in this step of the process in a thoughtful and timely manner.
Dr. Angela Reiter has completed countless Pre-Adoption Evaluations and is highly familiar with the requirements with numerous countries who participate in international adoptions.
Contact us today to start the Pre-Adoption Evaluation process.
We start with a free 15 minute phone consultation to discuss the requirements for the country you plan to adopt from as well as details of the process and costs.
Then we schedule approximately 3-4 hours of time (which can take place on the same day if needed, or spread out over several sessions depending upon your schedule).
After the interview and testing, the report will be sent to the required parties within 2-3 weeks.
Contact Dr. Angela Reiter Associates in Eastchester, NY today!



####
document number 6: 
Treatment works and recovery is possible


Reaching out for help led to a better life


Veterans describe an effective therapy method


Exposure therapy can provide relief and recovery


Read VA's latest coronavirus information.
If you have flu-like symptoms such as fever, cough, and shortness of breath, please call before you visit your local medical center or clinic.
If you have an appointment, consider making it a telehealth appointment.

Just like physical health, mental health is important at every stage of life and is essential to your overall well-being.

Although Veterans can often recognize when to treat their physical injuries, it can be harder for them to identify mental health or readjustment challenges.
Some Veterans — or their loved ones — may notice symptoms and experiences affecting their lives, but aren’t sure what to do about them.
Others may think nothing can be done or may have concerns about the impact of treatment.

About Seeking Mental Health Treatment



For almost every mental health condition, there are a number of effective treatments that can help you cope with symptoms and greatly improve your quality of life.


You may need to work with your physician or mental health professional and to try different types of treatment before finding the one that’s best for you.
VA specializes in providing care for Veterans, and it has clinicians who can help you find the right combination of care and treatment for your unique situation.


Most treatments can produce positive and meaningful changes in symptoms and quality of life after just a brief amount of time.


Treatment can help you understand your condition and change how you think about it, in part by identifying steps to improve your response to emotional triggers, stressful situations, and other challenges in your life.



Types of Treatment


The following types of treatment may be used independently or in combination:


Therapy or counseling can help you learn new ways of thinking, practice positive behaviors, and take active steps to move beyond your symptoms.
Cognitive behavioral therapy is one type of counseling that research shows is effective for a number of different mental health challenges.
Therapy or counseling may be one-on-one, in a group, with you and your family, or some combination of these approaches.


Medications work in different ways to manage the chemicals in your brain that may affect the way you feel.


Self-help approaches may be used to support other treatments and may include participating in 12-step meetings and using apps or other tools suggested by your treatment provider.
VA has developed useful Web-based training tools and apps for Veterans, several of which can be found here: www.veterantraining.va.gov


Peer support services, in which Veterans who have experienced mental health challenges themselves provide support to fellow Veterans, can be a powerful resource during the journey of recovery.



VA’s Guide to Mental Health Services describes what happens when you request mental health services from VA, discusses the different settings in which treatment is delivered, and lists the treatments for specific conditions, as well as providing other helpful information.

When to Get Treatment



Whether you just returned from a deployment, were stateside during your whole time in service, or have been home for 40 years, it’s never too late to get treatment or support for the challenges you face.
Even Veterans who didn’t realize they were dealing with a mental health condition for many years have improved their lives with treatment.


If you’ve just started experiencing symptoms — even if you aren’t even sure if anything is really wrong — reach out now.
Receiving treatment as soon as possible may help prevent your symptoms from getting worse.



Factors That Can Affect Treatment



Some conditions occur alongside other mental or physical challenges, which may mask certain symptoms or make them worse.
It’s helpful to have a full physical exam and mental health assessment for an accurate understanding of what’s going on.


Sometimes, alcohol or drug use can make mental health conditions worse and their treatments less effective.
Reducing your alcohol or drug use may be an important step toward getting the full benefits of your treatment.
There are VA and community treatment options available to help you decrease your alcohol or drug use, if needed.



Recovering from a mental health challenge is a process that involves hope, action, problem-solving, and tapping into or building up your support system — in addition to close guidance from a trained professional.
In recent years, research from around the world has dramatically increased our understanding of mental health conditions and how to treat them, enabling the successful treatment and recovery every day of Veterans who experience these conditions.
Our video gallery has hundreds of real stories from Veterans whose lives prove that treatment can work and recovery is possible.



####
document number 7: 
Phase 4 Clinical Trial Completed for Eye Drop Formula for Patients with Sjögren's Syndrome


A phase 4 clinical trial was recently completed for a prescription eye drop formula (LO2A, Wize Pharma) for symptomatic treatment of dry eye syndrome (DES) in patients with Sjögren's syndrome.

In the United States, more than 16 million Americans have DES and that number is expected to increase.
This growth is understood to be driven by an aging population, increased screen usage, exposure to air conditioning, and weather conditions.

The investigational eye drop treatment is not approved by the FDA, but was approved by the Israeli Ministry of Health for DES patients in Israel.
In order for the treatment to also be approved in that country for treatment of Sjögren's syndrome, the study was classified by the Israeli Ministry of Health as a post-marketing phase 4 study.

"Having completed the study, we now look forward to evaluating the data resulting from this phase 4 trial in Sjogren's.
We believe that positive results in this current study, when combined with the positive results from our Phase II conjunctivochalasis (CCh) study, will create a strong application package for an IND with the FDA," said Noam Danenberg, CEO of Wize Pharma, in a press release.

Due to the impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on the health care system and Wize Pharma’s current limited ability to access hospitals to monitor data, the release of topline results may potentially be delayed into the third fiscal quarter of 2020, according to Danenberg.

In order to test the prescription eye drop formula, the study was randomized and double-masked, with 60 patients who have Sjögren's syndrome and DES.
The study compared the prescription eye drop formula with an over-the-counter (OTC) lubricant eye drop product.
Over a 3 month period, each product was administered topically to 1 of 2 separate groups of patients’ eyes.

The primary endpoint of the study was a change in the corneal/conjunctival staining score based on the National Eye Institute (NEI) Industry Grading System after 3 months of treatment.
This measurement is a standard for objectively assessing the severity of damage caused by eye dryness.

The secondary endpoints were a change in the corneal/conjunctival staining score after 1 month of treatment, as well as a change in quality of life based on patients’ completion of subjective questionnaires after 1 and 3 months of treatment.

The formula has been approved for the symptomatic treatment of DES in patients with Sjögren's syndrome in the Netherlands and Hungary.

REFERENCE

Wize Pharma Completes Phase IV Study of LO2A for the Treatment of Dry Eye Syndrome in Patients with Sjögren's Syndrome [news release].
Hod Hasharon, Israel: Wize Pharma, Inc.
; May 7, 2020.
prnmedia.prnewswire.com/news-releases/wize-pharma-completes-phase-iv-study-of-lo2a-for-the-treatment-of-dry-eye-syndrome-in-patients-with-sjogrens-syndrome-301054900.html.
Accessed May 11, 2020.



####
document number 8: 
China shares with world new progress in COVID-19 treatment


China has reported new progress in the research of COVID-19 drugs and therapies, sharing with the world its clinical experience and achievements and pushing forward international cooperation in the study of the disease.


China has reported new progress in the research of COVID-19 drugs and therapies, sharing with the world its clinical experience and achievements and pushing forward international cooperation in the study of the disease.


A staff member tests samples of the COVID-19 inactivated vaccine at a vaccine production plant of China National Pharmaceutical Group (Sinopharm) in Beijing, capital of China, April 11, 2020.
[Photo/Xinhua]

One of the highlights of the new progress is stem cell treatment, which has been used in more than 200 cases in Wuhan, the hardest-hit city amid the epidemic in China, Sun Yanrong, deputy head of the China National Center for Biotechnology Development under the Ministry of Science and Technology, said at a press conference on Tuesday.

Clinical trials show that the therapy is safe, and can increase the cure rate of severe patients by inhibiting lung inflammation and improve the respiratory function of patients in the rehabilitation period, according to Sun.

China has also made progress in convalescent plasma therapy.
So far, more than 700 patients have received such treatment with good effects.
The median length of stay in ICU of the patients receiving convalescent plasma therapy was significantly shorter than that in the control group, Sun said.

Since the outbreak of COVID-19, China has launched 27 projects in the research of drugs, therapies and related technologies.
More than 3,200 researchers from 152 hospitals, universities and institutions across China, including those on the front line of the fight against COVID-19 in Wuhan, have participated in the research.

At present, clinical trials on four drugs are in progress, and more than 10 research achievements have been included in the diagnosis and treatment guidelines on COVID-19, Sun said.

Currently, the main drugs used in treating COVID-19 cases in China include Chloroquine Phosphate, Favipiravir and traditional Chinese medicines.

Several Chinese research teams are focusing on the utilization of monoclonal antibodies, and have achieved some progress, Sun said.

In addition, Chinese researchers have developed human immunoglobulin from the COVID-19 convalescent plasma, which could be used in the clinical treatment of patients, as well as the passive immune protection of high-risk groups.

China is also promoting research on independently developed drugs, and accelerating the clinical research on a series of drugs including traditional Chinese medicines, Carrimycin, Tetrandrine and Azvudine, Sun said.

China has shared with the world its experience in epidemic prevention and control at the earliest possible date, with the results of Chinese scientists' clinical research on COVID-19 quickly published in international academic journals.

According to incomplete statistics, Chinese research teams have conducted academic exchanges and discussions with over 140 countries and regions on new research progress and clinical application experience involving traditional Chinese medicines, Chloroquine Phosphate, Favipiravir, Tocilizumab, convalescent plasma therapy and stem cell treatment.

A number of Chinese research achievements have been applied in the clinical treatment of COVID-19 in other countries.

The World Health Organization and some countries are also carrying out clinical research on Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine.
Several drugs and therapies used by China such as convalescent plasma therapy and Tocilizumab have also been approved by many countries in their treatment or clinical research, Sun said.

She said the development of the drugs and therapies requires the wisdom of the whole world.
Chloroquine Phosphate was invented by German scientists 80 years ago, Favipiravir was developed by Japanese scientists 20 years ago, and Carrimycin was created by Chinese scientists 30 years ago.

She said China is actively expanding the channels of international scientific and technological cooperation and promoting joint clinical research on the disease.

MORE FROM China SCIO





####
document number 9: 
Case Study: How patent attorneys and clients work together


Nick Gorgani is a medical doctor, scientist and inventor of a world-first sustainable treatment for Type 2 Diabetes - he is also the first person to admit he knew nothing about how to write and prosecute a patent.

So when clinical case studies showed Dr Gorgani’s treatment could normalise patients’ blood sugar levels without the side effects usually associated with anti-diabetes drugs and without losing effectiveness in the way that currently marketed treatments do, he sought the help of a patent attorney.

'I had no idea at that time.
I’m a scientist so I knew what a patent does, but I didn’t know how to draft and prosecute the patent application,' he says.
Dr Gorgani, who is founder and chief executive officer of OzStar Therapeutics, which is developing the treatment, contacted an IP attorney firm.

The firm provided Dr Gorgani with a comprehensive overview of the patenting process, including how best to draft the application and which information and experimental data to include.
'I got all the information to them and they cleaned it up and made it such that we could include it in our specification,' Gorgani says.

It was of great assistance that the patent attorney is a former medical researcher who understood the technical aspects of the invention as well as the necessary legal requirements for obtaining patent protection.
In fact, all registered Australian (Trans-Tasman) patent attorneys are required to have a technical or scientific degree in patentable subject matter.

Along with the Australian patent, Dr Gorgani also applied for patent protection overseas, choosing 12 countries according to the greatest market potential for Type 2 diabetes treatment.

He says he enjoyed working closely with his attorney.
‘Choosing a patent attorney that you can get along with and work transparently with are the key aspects involved in successful patent drafting and prosecution,’ he says.

Dr Grant Shoebridge, the attorney working with Dr Gorgani, agrees, saying communication and trust are vital.

'A good experience is really about effective communication between the patent attorney and the inventor,' he says.
'Beneficial outcomes are achieved when the inventor provides full disclosure in relation to his invention and does not hold back any information.'

The attorney also needs to be upfront with the client about all of the steps involved in the patent process including, most importantly, the timing and costs.

Dr Gorgani is a good client to work with because he is passionate about his invention and really understands the technology.
'He provides excellent technical information that I can use during the prosecution of his applications and that contributes to maximising the scope of protection that is ultimately obtained' Dr Shoebridge says.



####
document number 10: 
FDA Approves Once-Daily ADHD Treatment Mydayis for Patients 13 Years and Older


Yesterday, the FDA approved Mydayis, a new medication for attention deficit disorder (ADHD or ADD) designed for all-day symptom control in patients 13 years of age or older.
Shire, Mydayis’ manufacturer, stated in a press release that the medication would become available to consumers in the third quarter of 2017.

Mydayis is a long-acting, triple-bead, mixed amphetamine salts formulation planned for once-daily ADHD treatment for adults and children patients 13 and older.

Mydayis’ efficacy was tested on more than 1,600 subjects, all over the age of 13, over the course of 16 clinical studies.
Mydayis was found to significantly improve ADHD symptoms in subjects when compared to a placebo, researchers reported — starting at 2 to 4 hours post-dose and lasting up to 16 hours.

Shire reports that side effects across all studies were generally "mild to moderate in severity," and similar to those associated with other amphetamines.
The most common side effects in adults were decreased appetite, weight loss, sleeplessness, dry mouth, increased heart rate, and anxiety.
Teens between the ages of 13 and 17 most commonly reported sleeplessness, nausea, irritability, and weight and appetite loss.

Shire first applied for FDA approval for Mydayis in 2006, but were instructed to conduct additional studies.
Following yesterday’s approval, Shire announced plans to launch Mydayis later in 2017.

"With this approval, we hope to help patients who need a once-daily treatment option," said Flemming Ornskov, M.D., MPH, CEO of Shire.

Updated on March 23, 2018



####
document number 11: 
Kimera® Labs Files First FDA Investigational New Drug (IND) Application Using XoGlo® for Treatment of ARDS Secondary to COVID-19


MIRAMAR, Fla., Aug.
18, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Kimera® Labs Inc, a privately held clinical stage biotechnology company, announces the filing of an extended FDA Investigational New Drug (IND) application to study the treatment of COVID-19 related inflammatory disease using Kimera's first-in-class XoGlo® isolated placental mesenchymal stem cell-based exosomes.
Founded in 2012, Kimera® generated the first publicly available isolated exosome product.
Kimera currently employs 40 PhDs, technicians and staff at its Miramar Florida 27,000 sq. ft.
GMP manufacturing facility, the first and only laboratory dedicated solely to exosome R and production in the US.

Exosomes have been referenced in scientific and medical publications to exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, including recently published articles on their investigational use for the treatment of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) secondary to COVID-19 infection.
Kimera® believes that its strict donor screening practices, ultra purification methods, and current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMPs) ensure the quality and purity of its exosome products for the intended IND clinical trial.
The Company is proposing a 160 patient clinical trial in a non-hospital ambulatory setting.

"I am very proud to have overseen the development of this company from its creation without outside investment to the delivery of a robust FDA IND application, in advance of the stipulated FDA conformance May 2021 date," stated Kimera® Labs founder and CEO, Duncan Ross PhD.
"Our completed IND document was a six year project that involved the input of a team of passionate scientists operating without a guidebook in a novel, constantly evolving field of virus sized particles."

Since 2016, Kimera® has invested in unrivaled in-house research and production capacity to support additional IND applications coming over the next 12 months.
Kimera® employs a number of in-house laboratory assays and proprietary exosome characterization methods, including its ONI super-resolution microscope which uses Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM), to better characterize and optimize its exosome products.
Jan Torres, COO of Kimera®, states that "this significant investment has allowed us to put forth what we hope to be the most well-described extracellular vesicle IND application at this time.
Furthermore, we hope that these well characterized proofs will allow us to output multiple IND-approved therapeutic treatments for various afflictions within the next two years."

SOURCE Kimera Labs Inc

Related Links


http://www.kimeralabs.com



####
document number 12: 
Start A Business By Helping Others



Many people have this idea that they can start a business by helping others.
But few act on their instincts.

Kathryn Jones is one of those who decided to turn her passion for improving others’ lives into a business that is helping children who are facing medical treatment get the emotional support they need.

Kathryn is co-founder and head of product development for SuperHealos, a company dedicated to helping children facing medical treatment feel like superheroes.

Before living life as an entrepreneur, Kathryn was in fashion and event coordination, organizing events all over Manhattan including the famed Mercedes Benz fashion shows.


Although the fast paced environment was exciting, her love of helping others prompted her to start a second career as an Occupational Therapist.
Through physical rehab, she helps people of all ages live their lives as independently and meaningfully as possible.

Working at the hospital bedsides of children and families, Kathryn realized that fear of the unknown was the worst thing for someone trying to recover from illness and injury.
When approached by a good friend and asked to start SuperHealos, a company focused on using superheroes and education to reduce fear for children facing medical treatment, she jumped at the chance.
As well as enjoying the opportunity to merge her passions for design and health care, Kathryn is loving her new title as a "superhero of health!"

Listen to the story of how Kathryn and her partner dove right in when the idea struck them for SuperHealos.
They did not rely on extensive market research—instead, they started with nothing more than their passion and basic materials to create their first prototype products (superhero capes) for children.
"I think being naive helps us quite a bit, because [starting a business] can be very paralyzing," Kathryn says.

She talks about running a successful Kickstarter campaign, along with getting a lot of support through the InnoLoft, an accelerator program sponsored by Constant Contact in Boston.

Show Sponsors


LeadPages let’s you launch and test landing pages, pop-up sign up forms and more.
Find out why it is the industry’s leading solution for landing pages.

Increase your visibility, thought leadership and lead generation efforts by being a guest on top podcasts.
Let the experts at Interview Valet propel your business to the next level.

SiteGround is a top web host for startups — with plans starting at just $3.95 per month.

The Ultimate Business Checklist will give you all the steps you need to take when starting your company, including estimated costs and timeframes.

Show Links


Disclosure of Material Connection: Some of the links in the post above are "affiliate links."
This means if you click on the link and purchase the item, I will receive an affiliate commission.
Regardless, I only recommend products or services I use personally and believe will add value to my readers.
I am disclosing this in accordance with the Federal Trade Commission's 16 CFR, Part 255: "Guides Concerning the Use of Endorsements and Testimonials in Advertising."



####
document number 13: 
Miami-Area Therapist Sentenced to Prison in Florida in $205 Million Community Mental Health Fraud Scheme


WASHINGTON—Miami-area resident Nichole Eckert, former therapist at the mental health care company American Therapeutic Corporation (ATC), was sentenced today to serve 48 months in prison for participating in a $205 million Medicare fraud scheme.
The sentence was announced today by Assistant Attorney General Lanny A. Breuer of the Justice Department’s Criminal Division; U.S. Attorney Wifredo A. Ferrer of the Southern District of Florida; Special Agent in Charge Michael B. Steinbach of the FBI’s Miami Field Office; and Special Agent in Charge Christopher Dennis of the Health and Human Services’ Office of Inspector General (HHS-OIG), Office of Investigations, Miami Office.
Eckert, 35, was sentenced by U.S. District Judge Patricia A. Seitz in the Southern District of Florida.
In addition to the prison term, Judge Seitz sentenced Eckert to serve three years of supervised release and ordered her to pay more than $72 million in restitution, jointly and severally with her co-defendants.
On November 15, 2012, a federal jury in the Southern District of Florida found Eckert guilty of one count of conspiracy to commit health care fraud after a 16-day trial.
She has been in federal custody since her conviction.
Evidence at trial demonstrated that the defendant and her co-conspirators caused the submission of false and fraudulent claims to Medicare through ATC, a Florida corporation headquartered in Miami that operated purported partial hospitalization programs (PHPs) in seven different locations throughout South Florida and Orlando.
A PHP is a form of intensive treatment for severe mental illness.
The defendant and her co-conspirators also used a related company, American Sleep Institute, to submit fraudulent Medicare claims.
Evidence at trial revealed that ATC secured patients by paying kickbacks to assisted living facility owners and halfway house owners who would then steer patients to ATC.
These patients attended ATC, where they were ineligible for the treatment ATC billed to Medicare and where they did not receive the treatment that was billed to Medicare.
After Medicare paid the claims, some of the co-conspirators then laundered the Medicare money in order to create cash to pay the patient kickbacks.
Eckert was a therapist at ATC’s Ft.
Lauderdale, Florida center from September 2005 to September 2007 and returned to ATC as a therapist from late 2009 to October 2010, when ATC closed its doors as a result of federal charges.
Evidence at trial revealed that Eckert fabricated therapist notes and other documents for patient files and submissions, and taught others to fabricate them, to make it appear both that ATC patients were qualified for PHP treatment and that they were receiving the intensive, individualized treatment PHP is supposed to be.
ATC used those patient files to substantiate false and fraudulent claims to Medicare.
Included in these submissions were claims for patients who were in the late stages of diseases causing permanent cognitive memory loss and patients who had substance abuse issues and were living in halfway houses.
These patients were ineligible for PHP treatments, and because they were forced by their assisted living facility owners and halfway house owners to attend ATC, they were not receiving treatment for the diseases they actually had.
ATC and related company Medlink pleaded guilty in May 2011 to conspiracy to commit health care fraud.
ATC also pleaded guilty to conspiracy to defraud the United States and to pay and receive illegal health care kickbacks.
On September 16, 2011, the two corporations were sentenced to five years of probation per count and ordered to pay restitution of $87 million.
Both corporations have been defunct since their owners were arrested in October 2010.
Dozens of individuals have been convicted at trial or pleaded guilty for their participation in the scheme.
Evidence at trial showed that the ATC scheme resulted in a total of $205 million in fraudulent Medicare billings.
The cases were prosecuted by Senior Trial Attorney Jennifer L. Saulino and Trial Attorney Laura M.K. Cordova of the Justice Department Criminal Division’s Fraud Section.
The case was investigated by the FBI and HHS-OIG and was brought as part of the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, supervised by the Criminal Division’s Fraud Section and the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of Florida.
Since its inception in March 2007, the Medicare Fraud Strike Force, now operating in nine cities across the country, has charged more than 1,480 defendants who have collectively billed the Medicare program for more than $4.8 billion.
In addition, HHS’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, working in conjunction with HHS-OIG, is taking steps to increase accountability and decrease the presence of fraudulent providers.
To learn more about the Health Care Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Action Team (HEAT), go to www.stopmedicarefraud.gov.



####
document number 14: 
Her Own Birth Was 'Fertility Fraud' And Now She Needs Fertility Treatment


When Heather Woock was conceived, her mom sought the help of a fertility specialist.
What happened next was not what she was led to believe.
But it took three decades for it to come to light.


When Heather Woock was in her late 20s, she started researching her family history.
As part of the project she spit into a tube and sent it to Ancestry, a consumer DNA testing service.
Then in 2017, she started getting messages about the results from people who said they could be half-siblings.

"I immediately called my mom and said, 'Mom, is it possible that I have random siblings out there somewhere?'"
Woock says.
She remembers her mom responded, "No, why?
That's ridiculous."

But the messages continued, and some of them mentioned an Indianapolis fertility practice that she knew her mom had consulted with when she had trouble conceiving.

Woock did some research and finally learned the truth.
Donald Cline, the fertility doctor her mother saw in 1985, is her biological father.

"I went through an identity crisis," she says.
"I couldn't look in the mirror and think about, Where did my eyes come from?
Where did my hair color come from?
I didn't even want to think about any of that."

A photo of Larry Hobson holding his daughter, Heather Woock, as an infant.
Woock's mother consulted with a fertility doctor when she was having trouble getting pregnant.


Woock hadn't known that her mom used artificial insemination to conceive her and neither of them knew the doctor had used his own sperm.

"We now know Cline used his own sample and squirted it into my mom," Woock says.

In the 1970s and 80s, Cline deceived dozens of patients and used his own sperm to impregnate them.
He has more than 60 biological children — and counting.

For Woock, as the story of her parentage sunk in, it was distressing for another reason: She wanted to start her own family and was having trouble conceiving.
And now she needed to turn to the fertility industry that had so badly betrayed her mom.

Donald Cline, a former Indianapolis fertility specialist accused of impregnating his patients with his own sperm, in a mug shot from his arrest in 2016.
There was no law against what's called "fertility fraud" in Indiana until 2019.


"We were doing all of the calendaring ... everything that is out there to help you get pregnant, we were doing that," Woock recalls.

But after six months, when she still wasn't pregnant at 32, she went to a fertility clinic for some tests.

"I had to fill out all this paperwork, and there's a slot that says kind of like, 'Is there anything else you'd like to share?'
" Woock says.

Yes, there most certainly was.

Fertility treatment today

New allegations of doctors using their own sperm keep coming to light — thanks to genetic testing like Ancestry revealing networks of half-siblings — in states like Idaho, Ohio, Colorado, and Arkansas.

But those doctors performed artificial inseminations decades ago.
Could what happened to Woock's mom happen in a modern fertility clinic?

Dr.
Bob Colver, a fertility specialist in Carmel, Ind., says it's a question many of his patients have asked.
But he says it's unlikely.
These days, there are more people involved in the process, and in vitro fertilization happens in a lab, not an exam room.

"Unless you're in a small clinic where there's absolutely no checks and balances, I can't even imagine that today," Colver says.

It's now illegal in Indiana, Texas and California for a doctor to use his own sperm to impregnate his patients.
But there's no national law criminalizing what's called "fertility fraud."

Fertility medicine has advanced a lot since the 1980s, but women trying to get pregnant today with the help of medicine face a baffling array of treatment options that can be hard to navigate and can be hugely expensive.
And some critics say the growing, multi-billion dollar fertility industry needs more regulation.

For example, sperm banks may not get accurate medical histories from their donors, who could pass along genetic diseases.
And there's no limit on how many times a donor's sperm can be used, which some donor children worry could increase the chance of inbreeding.
Sperm donation guidelines from organizations like the American Society for Reproductive Medicine are voluntary.
There was a contestant on "The Bachelorette" last year who said his sperm helped father more than 100 kids.

Unrealistic expectations

When Woock decided to get her first fertility treatment, she set some preconditions with the clinic.
She insisted on having a female doctor and insisted that doctor be in the room for all appointments and would oversee everything that happened.

Her experience with her clinic was very different from mother's with Cline, but nonetheless there were some surprises along the way.

The clinic told her that her problems conceiving could be because of husband Rob's low sperm count and motility (meaning his sperm weren't great swimmers.)
They advised a form of in vitro fertilization that involved injecting one sperm directly into one of her eggs in a petri dish.

When doctors told Woock she needed IVF, she felt pretty optimistic.

"I'm thinking going into this that our chances of success are 70, 75%" Woock says.

Fertility treatment can be really expensive, and patients may start treatment with unrealistic expectations.
That's because success rates are complicated, and some clinics use only the best numbers in their advertising.

For example clinics can advertise high fertilization rates.
But a 70% fertilization rate doesn't mean 70% of eggs turn into babies – plenty can go wrong after the lab combines egg and sperm.

Success depends on your age, your clinic, and the type of procedure you need.
But most of the time, assisted reproduction procedures such as IVF don't work.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which tracks assisted reproduction rates in the U.S., reports only about 24% of attempts result in a baby.

'Add-on' technology — and prices

When Woock started her first IVF cycle, she gave herself shots, a couple a day, to stimulate her ovaries to get multiple eggs ready at once.
Multiple eggs means more chances for fertilization.

But the drugs have side effects.
They gave her headaches, and made her moody and less patient.

"I was actually allergic to one of the medications, which just means that you keep taking it and deal with the itching and rash," Woock says.

But she hung on until it was time for a doctor to surgically retrieve her eggs, at which point patients can face even more choices.
Because the couple's fertility problem appeared to be with Rob's sperm, the clinic offered to use a special device to help pick the best sperm for IVF.

"We were kind of like yeah, 'Why wouldn't you?'"
Woock says.
"If it's gonna give us a better chance, do it."

A device like that is called an add-on.
Add-ons are often new technology, described as cutting edge, which can appeal to patients.
Examples of add-ons include genetic testing for chromosomal abnormality in embryos — which some specialists argue improve the odds of live birth — and assisted hatching and endometrial scratching, both methods claiming to facilitate implantation.

Jack Wilkinson, a bio-statistician at the University of Manchester, researches add ons, which he has found can increase costs — and, he says, they may not work.

"We quite often see there's no benefit at all," Wilkinson says.
"Or, possibly even worse, that there's a disadvantage of using that treatment."

Wilkinson says the device Woock's clinic offered could work, but the evidence supporting it is thin.

Failed fertilizations

The clinic called Woock the morning after her egg retrieval.
None of Woock's eggs fertilized.
The procedure revealed that her husband's sperm quality wasn't the only fertility issue the couple faced.

"They immediately saw that there was something wrong with my eggs," Woock says.
"My eggs are just total crap."

She underwent a second round of IVF with the same result – no fertilization.

"Getting that news the second time ... felt even more set in stone that this was going to be a very long, challenging road," Woock says.

Challenging and expensive.
Most states, including Indiana, don't require insurers to cover fertility treatment.
Without insurance, a round of IVF can cost more than $10,000, even more than $20,000, with no guarantee the patient will get pregnant.

Woock was lucky that her employer-provided insurance covered a lot.
But it still wasn't cheap.
She had to pay for some medications, "plus, you have to pay lab and facility fees that insurance doesn't pay," Woock says.

Donor sperm and eggs aren't generally covered, either.
Those can be tens of thousands of dollars.

Woock faced a hard choice: After two failed attempts, did she want a kid enough to go through IVF again?

She and her husband decided they did.
So Woock did a third round of IVF.
And then a fourth.
When that didn't work, she gave up on using her own eggs.

"What I expected as I was growing up and picturing my children is not what I will see," Woock says.

Woock and her husband decided to try donor eggs.
If all goes according to plan, she could still carry a child.
She wants to keep trying.

"I realize that pregnancy is incredibly challenging on your body and your mental state," she says.
"If I can make it through a year of IVF, I can make it through morning sickness."

This story is part of a partnership between NPR, Kaiser Health News, and the podcast,

Sick

.
You can hear more about the doctor who used his own sperm on Sick's first season.

Subscribe

wherever you get your podcasts, and go to

sickpodcast.org

for more information.



By subscribing, you agree to NPR's terms of use and privacy policy.
NPR may share your name and email address with your NPR station.
See Details.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.



####
document number 15: 
FDA Expected To Approve Esketamine Nasal Spray For Depression


The Food and Drug Administration is expected to approve a new type of drug for depression.
It is esketamine, a chemical cousin of the anesthetic and party drug ketamine.

AUDIE CORNISH, HOST:

The Food and Drug Administration is about to approve a nasal spray that can relieve severe depression in hours instead of weeks.
The drug is based on the anesthetic ketamine, which is also a mind-altering party drug.
And as NPR's Jon Hamilton reports, it represents the first truly new drug for depression in decades.

JON HAMILTON, BYLINE: The drug is called esketamine, and it works through a different mechanism than antidepressants like Prozac, which have been around since the 1980s.
In early February, advisers to the FDA recommended approving esketamine.
The agency is expected to follow their advice any day now.

Dr.
Dennis Charney is dean of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York.
He says esketamine's means approval would be a big deal.

DENNIS CHARNEY: This is potentially a game-changer for millions of people.

HAMILTON: Charney says esketamine works quickly and can help patients with major depressive disorder who haven't improved on other drugs.

CHARNEY: Many of them are suicidal, so it's essentially a deadly disease when you haven't responded to available treatments and you've been suffering for years, if not decades.

HAMILTON: Charney holds patents associated with both ketamine and esketamine.
He also helped conduct the first studies, done two decades ago, showing that ketamine could treat depression.
Charney says esketamine's imminent approval shows that this early work was on the right track.

CHARNEY: For me, it's very gratifying.
And I think the key word for patients is hope.

HAMILTON: But esketamine presents some challenges because of its similarities to ketamine.
In high doses, both drugs can cause sedation and out-of-body experiences.
And ketamine, often called Special K in its illicit form, has become a popular party drug.
So Johnson Johnson, the company that developed esketamine, has promised to make sure it will be used only as intended.

Courtney Billington is president of Janssen Neuroscience, a part of Johnson Johnson.
He says esketamine, if approved, will be marketed under the brand name Spravato.

COURTNEY BILLINGTON: Spravato will not be dispensed directly to a patient to take it home.
It will only be available in approved and certified treatment centers.

HAMILTON: Billington says esketamine will be limited to patients who have tried at least two other anti-depressants.
They'll visit a treatment center once or twice a week to inhale the drug under supervision.
And Billington says hallucinogenic experiences are unlikely.

BILLINGTON: The amount of active ingredient that's in this product is at a very, very low dose.

HAMILTON: The FDA's decision on esketamine comes as more and more doctors have begun administering a generic version of ketamine for depression.
The generic is approved only as an anesthetic, but doctors can legally prescribe it for other medical uses.
Dr. Demitri Papolos, director of research for the Juvenile Bipolar Research Foundation, prescribes ketamine for a disorder that includes symptoms of depression.
He predicts that doctors already comfortable with ketamine will continue to offer the treatment.

DEMITRI PAPOLOS: I certainly hope so because it'll be a lot less expensive and a lot easier for their patients.

HAMILTON: Papolos says the generic form is cheap and can be taken at home in a nasal spray once patients know the right dose.
Papolos also says recent animal studies suggest that esketamine may be less potent than its older sibling.

PAPALOS: It may not be as effective as what is a generic, but any psychiatrist or physician can prescribe without the restrictions that are going to be applied to esketamine.

HAMILTON: Generic ketamine costs only a few dollars a dose.
It's not clear yet how much esketamine will cost.
Jon Hamilton, NPR News.
Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = disaster recovery
document number 1: 
Haiti aid groups ask companies for cash, not goods


SAN FRANCISCO (Reuters) - Aid groups asked companies to donate cash to help earthquake relief efforts in Haiti instead of supplies like clothing and tents that they cannot distribute yet because of the devastation.


Residents walk in a destroyed area after a major earthquake hit the Haitian capital Port-au-Prince, January 14, 2010.
REUTERS/Jorge Silva


Relief groups are trying to address immediate needs such as clean water and medical supplies, and also are trying to keep airspace around Haiti clear for those needs.

Planes full of supplies headed to the Port-au-Prince airport on Thursday, but they arrived faster than ground crews could unload them.
Aviation authorities had to restrict non-military flights from U.S. airspace because they feared the planes would run out of fuel while waiting to land.

"This is not the moment to drop a container of cinderblocks or roofing material onto the tarmac.
We need to do first things first, and we’re in emergency relief mode," said David Owens, vice president of corporate development for humanitarian group World Vision.

A 7.0 magnitude earthquake devastated Haiti, the poorest nation in the western hemisphere, on Tuesday.
The quake flattened hillsides, knocked out communication systems, blocked roads, and rendered Haiti’s main seaport unusable.

Companies, including Lowe’s Cos Inc, Google, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs Group announced donations of $1 million each to help disaster relief efforts, but aid groups said many more millions of dollars will be needed.

"Right now, as of noon eastern, we’ve had $2.5 million worth of donations," said World Vision spokeswoman Anne Duffy.
"Our (U.S.) fund-raising goal right now is $20 million."

Troops arrived in Haiti on Thursday but U.N. peacekeepers around the city seemed overwhelmed by the enormity of the recovery task ahead.

"We just don’t know what to do," a Chilean peacekeeper said.
"You can see how terrible the damage is.
We have not been able to get into all the areas."

The Haitian Red Cross said it believed 45,000 to 50,000 people had died and 3 million more were hurt or left homeless by the quake.

President Barack Obama said he had dispatched U.S. troops and ships to Haiti to assist in earthquake rescue and recovery efforts, and he said the United States would spend $100 million for immediate relief efforts.

"We are telling people and corporations that it is most important to give cash, and then we will figure out what the most immediate needs are," said Joy Portella, communications director for relief group Mercy Corps.

"It’s hard to throw a bunch of stuff into an environment when you don’t know exactly what is needed."

Shipper FedEx urged people to donate money to legitimate charities.
It said it cannot accept relief shipments of aid collected by individuals or local organizations.

"Because of severe damage caused by the earthquake, our operations have been suspended into and out of the island until further notice.
All customer shipments are being held in Miami until we can resume operations."

MONEY NOW, CLOTHES LATER


MoneyGram International Inc said that through January 24, it would cut fees for money transfers to Haiti.
Western Union is not charging a transfer fee for any amount sent to Haiti from the United States, Canada and France for seven days, once service was re-established throughout the country.

Caryl Stern, president and CEO of the U.S. Fund for UNICEF, the United Nations Children’s Fund, said in an interview on Wednesday that cash is the easiest donation to put to use in the immediate wake of disaster.

"I heard from one of our terrific partners whose in the fashion industry offering, do you need clothes?
There will be a moment that clothes will be needed for children.
That’s not what’s needed today though because then we have to go through the expense of getting them there, distributing them," she said.
"We can’t do that right now."


Slideshow (5 Images)

World Vision’s Owens said cash would be used to buy more of the supplies that it is sending to Haiti, like hygiene kits filled with toilet paper, toothbrushes, combs and body soap.

In some instances, donations of products or services, such as shipping companies flying in supplies or health care companies donating specific medical equipment, are helpful in the early stages of the disaster, aid groups said.

"When UPS provided free transport to help us get water filtration systems to Zimbabwe during a cholera outbreak, the transportation was a really really helpful thing," said Stephanie Kurzina, vice-president for resource development at Oxfam America.

UPS said its transportation team is identifying ocean ships and aircraft that could be used to deliver goods to Haiti.

Meanwhile, Nestle Waters North America and PepsiCo Foundation are donating bottled water, while Procter Gamble said is providing packets of water purifier.

Discount retailer Target Corp is donating $500,000 to the American Red Cross, and helping prepare more than 1 million meals that will be delivered to earthquake victims by the nonprofit organization ImpactLives.

Wal-Mart Stores Inc said on Wednesday that it was donating $500,000 to the Red Cross and sending prepackaged food kits valued at $100,000 to Haiti.

Spokeswoman Deisha Galberth said it made the donations after discussing with the Red Cross its most urgent needs.
Galberth said Wal-Mart would donate more money or supplies, like tents or food, depending on the Red Cross’ needs.

"We are here, waiting for the specifics around what kind of donations are needed," she said.

UNICEF’s Stern said corporations could also use the "power of their podiums" to alert the American public how they can make donations to help relief efforts.

"They’re running ads every day this week, they’re doing commercials, they’re sponsoring programs," she said.
"To the extent that they will give up air time or allow public service announcements ... that kind of stuff is a phenomenal gift."

Additional reporting by Tom Brown and Andrew Cawthorne in Port-au-Prince, Helen Chernikoff in New York and Jessica Wohl in Chicago; Reporting by Nicole Maestri.
Editing by Robert MacMillan





####
document number 2: 
Never Be Ashamed of Seeking Help



Being human can be hard.
We have these things called thoughts and emotions that have a grip on our well-being.
If you’re like me, you have a past or current history of mental health issues.
Those issues, or mental illnesses, often occur when those same thoughts and emotions or set off by internal or external triggers.
The triggers can have a negative effect on your behavior, mental and physical health.

It’s possible that you decided to click and read this article to find some type of insight.
To come to an understanding of what is actually going on inside of your head.
Or to discover that there are other people in the world like yourself.
People who are facing the same issues.
Going through the same highs and lows of mental illness, and combatting the same stigma.

I am one of those people.
By sharing not only my past experience to recovery but also by giving tips on ways to seek help, I aim to help you with your recovery.

Battling Stigmas of Mental Health


Mental illness is never fought alone.
"I’m not crazy, or at least, I don’t think I am" is something I would say to myself while battling bouts of depression.
At the time, I didn’t realize that I was internalizing the stigmas of mental illness.
I defined myself and illness through the misconception of stigma.
I had to realize that I wasn’t crazy, which was my first step to recovery.

Mental health stigma is a huge barrier on why many people don’t seek help.
We don’t want to be judged for seeking treatment.
We don’t want to be defined as weak or incompetent, or even worse, seen as unable to take care of ourselves.

Internalizing these stigmas is the first step to feeling shame and embarrassed.
Yet, it takes an entire community to battle the stigmas of mental illness.
Awareness starts with educating and informing yourself.
As well as educating your family, friends, school, and co-workers in order to spread awareness.
Through encouraging ourselves and others who are suffering from mental illness to speak up, we can create a culture of recovery.
Spreading awareness to disseminate false stereotypes to break down mental health stigma.

It is critical to not give into stigma and seek the help that you need.
It may seem like an easy task but as we all may be aware of, it is scary.

The Roller Coaster of Mental Illness


I’ve always liked to give the metaphor of mental illness to a roller coaster.
A continuous ride of twist and turns, ups and down.
The roller coaster makes getting to the point of recovery feel like an uphill battle.

The roller coaster of mental illness along with the many stigmas contributed to my fear and refusal to seek help.
Instead, I choose to self-diagnose.
I began binge drinking, building unhealthy habits, and ignoring my symptoms.
Which lead me to a deep state of depression.

Seeking help for mental health can seem like a daunting task.
Especially when the roller coaster of mental illness has you trapped on the ride.
Making recovery impossible and shameful.
There is no shame in seeking help.

You are not alone on your battle or roller coaster of mental illness.
There are other people in the world going through the same thing.
So that stigma of you being crazy or weak by seeking help, it’s all fake news.

You may not always understand what’s going on in your mind or with your emotions and thoughts.
But by seeking help, it can help you understand why.

Making Mental Health a Priority


Seeking help starts with yourself.
Self-help is vital to the journey to recovery.
Self-help begins with self-awareness and self-discipline.
Self-awareness helps identify certain triggers of your mental illness.
While also being aware of what helps relieve them.
These triggers can range from high levels of stress, family, friends, relationships or even world events.

Whereas, self-discipline is the cornerstone of recovery.
Once you’ve identified your triggers, self-discipline improves your ability to manage them.
The lack of self-awareness and self-discipline can lead you down a destructive path of self-medication.
I’ve been down that path, it’s a lonely one.

Give yourself permission to seek help by taking care of yourself.
Exercise more often and go on that walk after work.
Start watching what you eat, get extra sleep, but most importantly find out what works best for you.
The most important self-care tip of all is to value your time and energy.
Start small, take your time, and be patient with yourself.

The Benefits of Therapy


Recovery goes beyond self-care.
Therapy can help you identify the healthy habits needed for self-care.

But then there’s the stigma of therapy that it’s only for crazy people.
This was something that I believed and it prevented me from ever stepping foot in a therapist office.
Which in turn, prolonged my recovery.

If it wasn’t for a close friend of mine that encouraged the idea of therapy.
I would have never developed the courage and self-awareness to enter therapy.
Therapy gave me the tools and techniques to live a more confident and emotionally balanced life.

Finding the right therapist can be a challenge.
It is important that you and your therapist have a genuine connection and built up trust.
They are someone to talk to.
It feels good to have someone to help investigate your thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.

A good therapist, or also a clinical social worker, can provide the right type of insight into your recovery.
They can give evidence-based tips to help you meet your recovery goals.
Therapy can help you identify the healthy habits needed for self-care.
Along with the providing recommendations on routines to support a healthy life.

Therapy fosters help, empowerment, and motivation.
For me, therapy helped improve my life, my relationships, and assisted with getting to the root of my problems.

Don’t Be Ashamed


Don’t be ashamed of seeking help on your road to recovery.
As recovery is remembering who you are and using your strengths to become all that you were meant to be.
By seeking help through self-care and therapy, you will begin to find yourself again.
Mental health is as important as physical health and both your mind and body will thank you.

Jeremy Divinity is a blogger, freelance writer, and digital marketer from Los Angeles.
He writes for onlinemswprograms.com and publishes on his personal blog which can be found at www.jeremydivinity.com.


Share your story, message, poem, quote, photo or video of hope, struggle or recovery.
By sharing your experience, you can let others know that they are not alone.



####
document number 3: 
Afya WORKS WITH OTHERS TO AIR LIFT SUPPLIES TO PUERTO RICO


GOVERNOR CUOMO ANNOUNCES ADDITIONAL STATE POLICE, NYPA WORKERS, PORT AUTHORITY EMERGENCY PERSONNEL DEPLOYED TO PUERTO RICO TO ASSIST WITH ONGOING EMPIRE STATE RELIEF AND RECOVERY EFFORT


72 Port Authority Emergency Personnel to Assist in Coordinated Recovery Efforts

53 Troopers Deployed to Assist with Security Operations

10 Power Transmission and Generation Experts, Project Managers Deploy to Assist with Electricity Recovery on the Island

First Shipment of Critical Medical Supplies and Medication Departs from Long Island

Photos of Troopers and NYPA Workers Departing for Puerto Rico Available Here

Governor Andrew M. Cuomo today announced the deployment of additional personnel and medical supplies to Puerto Rico through the Empire State Relief and Recovery Effort.
The State deployed 72 Port Authority personnel this morning from the agency’s Aviation, Port and Police departments, as well as the Office of Emergency Management, following an advance team of five that departed yesterday.
Governor Cuomo also deployed 53 members of the State Police assist with security operations and 10 additional experts from the New York Power Authority to aid the Puerto Rican government with its ongoing power restoration efforts.
In addition, a shipment of critical medication and supplies organized by New York State departed from Republic Airport bound for San Juan, Vieques, and Culebra.

These deployments are all part of the Governor’s Empire State Relief and Recovery Effort for Puerto Rico.

"New York will continue to stand with the people of Puerto Rico during every step of their recovery, and these experts and resources will help our brothers and sisters rebuild and stay safe," Governor Cuomo said.
"I am proud these fine New Yorkers have answered the call to help our fellow Americans in their moment of need, and I thank them for their service."

Port Authority Emergency Personnel

The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has deployed a 77-member team of emergency personnel and support equipment to assist Puerto Rico.
The team will be entirely self-sufficient to preserve limited food supplies and other resources on the island for its residents.
Staffers from the Port Authority’s Aviation Department are poised to help counterparts at San Juan International Airport and other airfields resume full flight operations.
Employees of the agency’s Port Department will assist in damage assessments at the Port of San Juan to help get shipping commerce back in operation.
Port Authority Police will send officers to provide security services.
The agency’s Office of Emergency Management also will send support equipment and members of its staff to provide assistance.

State Police

The State Police has deployed 53 troopers to assist with security operations.
Mission priorities include protecting commodities and fuel and securing the supply chains to ensure that the resources are distributed to people who need them most.

New York Power Authority Experts

The NYPA team will join NYPA technicians currently deployed in Puerto Rico, who have embedded into the emergency response team overseen by the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA).
The 10 new personnel are subject matter experts in power transmission, generation, substations, utility logistics, project management, construction and power system energization.
The NYPA team will coordinate directly with the United States Army Corp of Engineers and PREPA to help restore the damaged electric system.
It will also help coordinate the necessary utility mutual assistance process with the American Public Power Association and the Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council on the United States mainland.
The enhanced NYPA team in Puerto Rico will now exceed 20 energy and construction logistics experts, as well as two drone pilots from the Department of Environmental Conservation.

Medical Supplies

In partnership with the Greater New York Hospital Association and the Afya Foundation, a Yonkers-based non-profit organization that collects and delivers surplus medical supplies to support humanitarian efforts and health crises worldwide, the first shipment left Friday morning from Republic Airport with priority for Hospital Susana Centeno on the island of Vieques, the University Pediatric Hospital in San Juan, and for the health care community on the island of Culebra.
GNYHA donated syringes, and more than five thousand doses of vaccine and medication for conditions such as tetanus, infections, diabetes management and pain relief.
Other supplies donated through Afya include basic first aid, over-the-counter medication and suture kits.

Congresswoman Nydia M. Velázquez,

Co-Chair of the Empire State Relief Recovery Effort,

said, "The City of New York and the Island of Puerto Rico share an unbreakable bond.
From day one, Governor Cuomo has mobilized New York’s resources to address what is becoming by the hour, a deepening humanitarian crisis.
I commend the Governor’s latest action to boost emergency personnel, supplies and bring much needed repairs to the Island’s electrical grid.
As the Co-Chair of the Empire State Relief and Recovery Effort, I will continue to work at all levels of government until Puerto Rico is made whole again."

Assemblyman Marcos Crespo,

Co-Chair of the Empire State Relief Recovery Effort

, said, "New Yorkers always stand with their friends in a time of need and thanks to the leadership of Governor Cuomo, we have continued to deploy a wealth of critical resources needed to help our brothers and sisters in Puerto Rico.
Recovering from the devastation of Hurricane Maria will be a long and difficult process, but New Yorkers will be standing shoulder to shoulder with them every step of the way."

Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr. said, "The delivery of these much-needed medical supplies to the people of Vieques is fantastic news.
I want to thank GNYHA for the donation, the Afya Foundation for providing the flight and Governor Cuomo and his office for facilitating the delivery.
Puerto Rico needs every bit of help it and get, and I greatly appreciate the support that has come from everywhere during the island’s time of need."

Port Authority Executive Director Rick Cotton said, "The images from Puerto Rico are heartbreaking and we are proud to be part of Gov.
Cuomo’s massive emergency response team to assist in the recovery.
Our aviation, port, police and emergency management staff will bring a wealth of critical expertise in their fields to help their counterparts and residents in the Commonwealth as they recover from this tragic event."

State Police Superintendent George P.
Beach II said, "Our Troopers always stand at the ready to provide any assistance needed, whether it’s near or far.
We are committed to our mission in Puerto Rico, helping our friends and neighbors as they work to recover from the devastation of Hurricane Maria."

Gil C. Quiniones,

NYPA President and CEO

, said, "The Power Authority is proud to assist the people of Puerto Rico during the terrible devastation left in the wake of Hurricane Maria.
During my visit to Puerto Rico with the Governor last week, I was overwhelmed by the destruction and loss throughout the island.
The NYPA technicians are very familiar with PREPA’s electric system, as it is very similar to New York State’s system, so I am confident that our expertise will be of significant value on the ground as we continue to coordinate with federal and local partners to repower Puerto Rico."

Greater New York Hospital Association Ventures President Lee H. Perlman said, "New York’s health care community is committed to helping Puerto Rico however we can, and GNYHA’s ability to access desperately needed pharmaceuticals and other medical supplies is an immediate and impactful way to do that.
We are very proud to partner with Governor Cuomo and the Afya Foundation on this important mission to help Puerto Rico’s health care community, and we look forward to securing more health care supplies for additional missions."

Afya Foundation Founder and Executive Director Danielle Butin, MPH, OTR said "We are thrilled to work with Governor Cuomo and GNYHA on behalf of Puerto Rico’s health care community.
By combining Afya’s years of experience responding to crises worldwide with the Governor’s fierce commitment to Puerto Rico and GNYHA’s ability to secure medical supplies, we have an opportunity to literally save hundreds of lives."

For more information about the recovery and relief efforts underway in Puerto Rico, and to learn how you can assist, please visit the Governor’s Empire State Relief and Recovery Effort for Puerto Rico webpage.

NYPA is the largest state public power organization in the nation, operating 16 generating facilities and more than 1,400 circuit-miles of transmission lines.
More than 70 percent of the electricity NYPA produces is clean renewable hydropower.
NYPA uses no tax money or state credit.
It finances its operations through the sale of bonds and revenues earned in large part through sales of electricity.
For more information visit www.nypa.gov and follow us on Twitter @NYPAenergy, Facebook, Instagram,Tumblr and LinkedIn.



####
document number 4: 
What Happens To Our Recyclables?
A Visit To The Sunset Park Material Recovery Facility



photo above courtesy of www.simsmunicipal.com














Have you ever wondered what happens to the curbside recycling that the New York City Department of Sanitation picks up weekly in front of our buildings?
If you live in Carroll Gardens, Cobble Hill, Boerum Hill, Gowanus and surrounding neighborhoods, what you collect in your blue and green recycling cans is transported directly to the Sunset Park Material Recovery Facility, which is operated by Sims Municipal Recycling (SMR).
The three year old state-of-the art facility is located on an 11-acre City-owned pier at the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal in Sunset Park.

Yesterday, I had the opportunity to learn about the facility on a tour organized by Community Board 6.
It was and led by Eadaoin Quinn, the Education and Administrative Coordinator for SMR.
After visiting the exhibit at the education center, where Quinn answered all sorts of questions related to recycling and re-using, the group got to see the actual sorting of material.
It was fascinating and inspired me to be even more committed to recycling.

SMR, a division of Sims Metal Management Limited, has a twenty year contract with the City's Sanitation Department "to provide processing and marketing services for 100% of the metal, glass and plastic and approximately 50% of the paper collected in the largest curbside program in North America."
SMR and DSNY work as partners to make curbside recycling efficient and effective in order to keep trash out of landfills.

Recyclable material is transported to the Recovery Facility from all five boroughs by truck, rail and barge.
Here, mounds of plastic, glass, and metal is sorted by sophisticated machinery.
The sorted material is then bundled so that it can be sold and shipped out to processors and manufacturers, which will repurpose the material.

Our paper and cardboard is also shipped here.
After the paper is sorted, it is directly shipped to a manufacturer in Staten Island who will use the pulp to make pizza boxes, tissues and other assorted paper products with it.

It is humbling to see the cheer volume that gets thrown out every day.
Luckily, all these empty cans and bottles will stay out of landfills.
So for all who still don't sort out their garbage into the proper bins because they believe that the Sanitation Department throws everything together anyway, that is simply not true.

Recycling, as well as composting, matters for us and for future generations.
So, please, just do it!

To take a tour and learn about recycling and sustainability, and witness it in action, contact the Sunset Park Material Recovery Facility here.



####
document number 5: 
Treatment works and recovery is possible


Reaching out for help led to a better life


Veterans describe an effective therapy method


Exposure therapy can provide relief and recovery


Read VA's latest coronavirus information.
If you have flu-like symptoms such as fever, cough, and shortness of breath, please call before you visit your local medical center or clinic.
If you have an appointment, consider making it a telehealth appointment.

Just like physical health, mental health is important at every stage of life and is essential to your overall well-being.

Although Veterans can often recognize when to treat their physical injuries, it can be harder for them to identify mental health or readjustment challenges.
Some Veterans — or their loved ones — may notice symptoms and experiences affecting their lives, but aren’t sure what to do about them.
Others may think nothing can be done or may have concerns about the impact of treatment.

About Seeking Mental Health Treatment



For almost every mental health condition, there are a number of effective treatments that can help you cope with symptoms and greatly improve your quality of life.


You may need to work with your physician or mental health professional and to try different types of treatment before finding the one that’s best for you.
VA specializes in providing care for Veterans, and it has clinicians who can help you find the right combination of care and treatment for your unique situation.


Most treatments can produce positive and meaningful changes in symptoms and quality of life after just a brief amount of time.


Treatment can help you understand your condition and change how you think about it, in part by identifying steps to improve your response to emotional triggers, stressful situations, and other challenges in your life.



Types of Treatment


The following types of treatment may be used independently or in combination:


Therapy or counseling can help you learn new ways of thinking, practice positive behaviors, and take active steps to move beyond your symptoms.
Cognitive behavioral therapy is one type of counseling that research shows is effective for a number of different mental health challenges.
Therapy or counseling may be one-on-one, in a group, with you and your family, or some combination of these approaches.


Medications work in different ways to manage the chemicals in your brain that may affect the way you feel.


Self-help approaches may be used to support other treatments and may include participating in 12-step meetings and using apps or other tools suggested by your treatment provider.
VA has developed useful Web-based training tools and apps for Veterans, several of which can be found here: www.veterantraining.va.gov


Peer support services, in which Veterans who have experienced mental health challenges themselves provide support to fellow Veterans, can be a powerful resource during the journey of recovery.



VA’s Guide to Mental Health Services describes what happens when you request mental health services from VA, discusses the different settings in which treatment is delivered, and lists the treatments for specific conditions, as well as providing other helpful information.

When to Get Treatment



Whether you just returned from a deployment, were stateside during your whole time in service, or have been home for 40 years, it’s never too late to get treatment or support for the challenges you face.
Even Veterans who didn’t realize they were dealing with a mental health condition for many years have improved their lives with treatment.


If you’ve just started experiencing symptoms — even if you aren’t even sure if anything is really wrong — reach out now.
Receiving treatment as soon as possible may help prevent your symptoms from getting worse.



Factors That Can Affect Treatment



Some conditions occur alongside other mental or physical challenges, which may mask certain symptoms or make them worse.
It’s helpful to have a full physical exam and mental health assessment for an accurate understanding of what’s going on.


Sometimes, alcohol or drug use can make mental health conditions worse and their treatments less effective.
Reducing your alcohol or drug use may be an important step toward getting the full benefits of your treatment.
There are VA and community treatment options available to help you decrease your alcohol or drug use, if needed.



Recovering from a mental health challenge is a process that involves hope, action, problem-solving, and tapping into or building up your support system — in addition to close guidance from a trained professional.
In recent years, research from around the world has dramatically increased our understanding of mental health conditions and how to treat them, enabling the successful treatment and recovery every day of Veterans who experience these conditions.
Our video gallery has hundreds of real stories from Veterans whose lives prove that treatment can work and recovery is possible.



####
document number 6: 
Old age home residents chip in with contribution to CM's relief fund



Residents of govt.
old age home, Thrissur handed over Rs 35,000 to chief minister's disaster relief fund (CMDRF) on August 26, Sunday.


Thrissur: Santha, 76, was disheartened by the news and visuals of floods that ravaged Kerala in August.
A keen follower of news channels, she shifted her mattress-weaving unit to the living room so that she doesn't miss any piece of news about floods.
She couldn't get a good night's sleep even after scanning the newspapers of August 15 and 16.
Disturbed, she visited Vincent George, the superintendent of the government old age home she stayed in.
Santha handed over Rs 1,500 to Vincent and asked him to transfer the amount to the chief minister's disaster relief fund (CMDRF).
Vincent received the amount with folded hands because he knew that it was all what Santha earned by weaving mattress, selling pickled mangoes and manufacturing papad.

Santha set a trend which was followed by all the other 73 residents of the home at Ramavarmapuram, Thrissur.
On August 26, Sunday, they handed over Rs 35,000 to VS Sunil Kumar, Kerala minister for agriculture and the legislator from the Kaipamangalam constituency, Thrissur.


Residents of govt old age home, Thrissur collect dress to distribute in flood relief camps in the district.


"I was moved when Santha approached me with a bundle of dirty notes.
She wanted me to hand it over to the disaster relief fund.
I know best how destitution and poverty feel," Vincent George said.
He quickly called a stand-up meeting of all the residents of the dormitory and announced Santha's act of generosity.
After a minute's silence, there came Saraswathy with two Rs 2000 notes.
George, Thankappan, Valsala, Janaki and all others followed.
Vincent, who intended to donate the Rs 1000 annual allotment for the Onam celebration to the relief fund, got more than Rs 20,000 from the residents.
The eight staff members also mopped up Rs 5,000.


Receiving the amount, minister VS Sunilkumar said it was one of the invaluable contributions the relief fund ever received.


The home has 74 residents, aged between 60 and 95.
They do pickle making, papad manufacturing and mattress-weaving to earn a livelihood.
Seven of them are totally bed-ridden and require personal help.

Receiving the amount, minister VS Sunilkumar said it was one of the invaluable contributions the relief fund ever received.
"It is not the amount that matters but the donor's willingness.
On that scale, this is the biggest sum we have ever received," he said.
Sunilkumar visited the home on Sunday to wish the residents a happy Onam.



####
document number 7: 
Broke my arm - a healthcare story



A doctor once said, You clearly don't half-ass things.
Your arm's broke as shit

I think everyone has close calls: those situations where you were just a split-second or random happenstance away from total disaster.
Well, I guess you also have those situations when the law of averages catches up to you and all the shit hits the fan.
I managed to completely break my ulna bone and dislocate my radius bone after falling off my bike.
Was probably going no more than 15mph, riding on flat ground, no cars around, no sudden distractions or surprises.
Best I can figure: I slipped off my pedals while signaling a left turn and managed to jam my brakes somehow.

Luckily, a passerby saw me crash and was nice enough to stop to make sure I was okay.
I most definitely was not.
I definitely couldn't move my left arm and really didn't want to try due to the pain.
He called 911 for me and stuck around until the police, firefighters, and paramedics arrived.
The police actually thought he might've hit me with his car.
I guess that was my first indication that I was in a pretty sorry state.
Any doubt of the seriousness of my injury was erased once the firefighters arrived and started whispering to each other.
Typically, I'd say that's a bad sign.
I thought it was kind of interesting that all 3 departments showed up.
It was a little more interesting (and annoying) that all 3 asked me the exact same questions over and over.
This would be a common theme for the rest of the day.
Where's that data management?!

My first ambulance ride was fairly uneventful.
They put me in a splint for transport to the nearest hospital.
I had a bunch of other scrapes, but I guess they didn't think it was too serious, so they left it for the ER.
X-rays were super painful.
The technician insisted on two views (standard procedure probably?
), and he had me lift my arm to get the second shot.
Aside from the pain, seeing half my ulna bone kind of poke up against my skin pretty much confirmed to me that I really fucked my arm up before the doctor had to say anything.

After x-rays, the hospital informed me that (surprise!)
my health insurance required that I get moved to another hospital since I wasn't in a critical condition.
They put me in a more proper cast and sent me downtown in another ambulance.
Seeing as how I make (really) good money, you'd think I would've sprung for the full-featured, totally comprehensive healthcare coverage.
Nope.
I can tell you now that I'd easily give back the $10 or so a month I saved for the more premium coverage.
That's the free market working as intended, I guess.

About three hours later, after going through the same thing at the second hospital that I did at the first, I got informed that since my fracture didn't break the skin, it was unlikely I would mess up my arm any further, so I could go home and schedule surgery later in the week.
That was both a relief and disappointment.
Things certainly could've been worse, but the last thing I wanted was to walk around with my arm bones literally side by side, not where they're supposed to be, for an unknown number of days.

In fact, surgery didn't happen until 5 days later, during which I got very little sleep due to the pain.
I think I could only nap for 1-2 hours at a time before I'd reflexively twitch and send a sharp pain coursing down my arm.
I've never been in a situation where I actually looked forward to a stranger cutting me open.
I had surgery on my other arm for a ligament issue about ten years ago, so I wasn't too worked up about the possible complications of surgery.
It was just another unavoidable thing that simply had to happen.
However, the anesthesiologists did inform me that I apparently have a very weird nerve cluster arrangement around the primary arteries near my neck/shoulder, which is a little disconcerting.

Surgery went well, I guess, and here I am, 10 weeks later, slowly rehabbing a left arm that's probably at 50% of its former utility at best.
Overall, I'd rate the experience a 2/10: would not recommend.

Some Actual Thoughts about Healthcare (the point of this post)



Shit could happen to anyone

- I obviously didn't plan or expect to break my arm.
I could probably ride that same route the same way a thousand more times and never remotely come close to how I managed to crash.


No one expects shit to happen to them

- Absent any warning or signs of risk, I think it's natural to underestimate the odds of something bad happening.
I believe that the vast majority of average people lead pretty uneventful, risk-free lives.


There seems to be very little natural incentive to get insurance

- I don't rock-climb or even really go outdoors.
I don't even own a car.
I probably lead one of the more boring and safe lives on the spectrum of lives one could lead.
I'd say I'm probably the poster child for someone who might elect to completely skip getting insurance if given the option to save some money.


I'd be financially hit pretty hard without insurance

- Sure, I have pretty substantial savings (see: boring life), and it's not like this was some crazy disease that required state of the art treatment from specialists, but the ambulance ride alone was 1.2k, the surgery was around 5-6k, ER expenses added up to about 2-3k, and the weekly rehab appointments would've cost a good amount as well.
A more thorough discussion could be had about price-markup and a need for more transparency in the healthcare industry, but I think it's a given that medical treatment can get pricey very quickly, and insurance (conceptually) is literally designed to mitigate that situation.


Recovery's physically painful but psychologically worse

- Bones and muscles more or less heal for the most part, even in injuries like mine, but the worry that you'll never fully get your full range of capabilities back is one that lingers.
Every bit of pain or stiffness triggers me to pull back or hesitate, and I can't shake this thought that the doctors messed up something.


Rehab's a full-time job and ain't no one got time for that

- Man, it's really hard staying on top of all the rehab exercises.
I swear, it feels like my therapist introduces new exercises every single week.
I'm sorry I ever doubted the rehabilitation robotics field.


Everyone needs someone

- Not many things exemplifies loneliness as struggling to take care of yourself properly, like tying your shoes or even getting into bed without pain.
Healthcare, whether preventative or after-the-fact, can be as dependent on your community and support network.
Don't know if this thought is more indicative of the disconnect in my own solitary life or society as a whole nowadays, but I really don't know how someone new to an area, away from family and a solid support network, can possibly deal with a major health issue.



tldr; When I was picking up my pain meds post-surgery, I saw a girl with two broken arms totally immobilized in casts.
Sucks to be her.



####
document number 8: 
Michael's Story


TELL US a LITTLE ABOUT YOUR TRAUMA STORY


"Don’t get up you were hit by a car…," fluttering eyelids, jolting me out of the empty darkness.
Blurred green, yellow, blue, and gray colors.
The wind faintly whispered "You were biking in Fulshear…."
I quickly sank back into the dark, empty void.

Passing the American flag next to the Fulshear Post Office, I remembered my appointment later in the morning to help my daughter with her college bank account for her first year in college.
I increased my tempo to 20 mph, as recorded on my Garmin Triathlon watch, in a sprint to the only stop light in town a mere mile down the carless road.

A blue Town and Country minivan sped up on the opposite side of the road.
The driver quickly turned left onto 4th Street, one block south of the post office.
Seeing bikers, she was trying to "beat the bikers" as she shakenly confessed to the police later.
She turned the minivan at roughly 30 mph right directly in front of the path of my bike.

"Oh SHIT!," I yelled.
Instincts kicked in as I attempted to maneuver away from the car once I realized a car had suddenly turned in front of me.
As we collided, I instinctively put down my left shoulder for the hit, as I had been taught by my grade-school and high-school football coaches.

It was a direct impact on me.
The front left end of my bike and the left side of my body struck the minivan.
I flew off the bike smashing my left shoulder, arm and ribs into the right front side quarter panel and shattering the front window shield with my left upper extremities.
The passenger side mirror broke.
Metal and glass cut deep into my left arm muscles.
My bike snapped in two.
Glass engraved scratches on my protective safety sun glasses, which saved my eyes, as it ripped a huge gash above my left eyebrow and forehead.
I flung off the van and smacked the ground into the empty, dark void of a concussion.

I should’ve died.

Yet, I survived.

Fortunately, road gravel slid into the exposed deep cuts in arm, and somehow by the fate of God, clogged the gash to my brachial artery.
This clogging prevented my death from exsanguination - the loss of blood.

The man kneeling next to me saved my life.
He was a former Army medic who was biking in the area.
Another biker summoned him to action as he rested at the gas station next to the stop light.
Without a hesitation, he raced his bike a few blocks to me.
He stabilized me until the local emergency services arrived.
He also had some call my wife, who rushed over the seven miles with my two daughters to help me.

I broke nine ribs and fractured my left knee and left shoulder blade.
Lacerations covered my left arm with the deepest cuts in my upper arm muscles.
I had a concussion.
My left lung collapsed, punctured from one or several of the nine broken ribs.
The medics feared damage to my spine, brain, and other internal organs.
Their concerns over internal injuries got me a ticket for a 35-mile helicopter ride to the Hermann Memorial Trauma Center near downtown Houston.
Memorial Hermann Trauma Center classified my injuries as a Level 2 Trauma.


WHAT WAS RECOVERY LIKE?


The initial recovery in the hospital ICU and subsequent home medical care basically was a matter or survival.
My left side of my body was immobile as I was unable to move my leg or lift my arm.
My second night after regaining consciousness, I turned to the night nurse who introduced herself as Nurse G and broke out crying asking "Why did this happen to me?"
She gestured to the nurse aid to pause, just allowing me to cry.
This simple act of compassion did so much to bolster my sense to have a semblance of control over myself.
The doctors, physical therapists, nurses, and countless others challenged me with breathing exercises to strengthen my lung and even to get out of bed to sit on a chair.
I went further and had my wife write on the medical communication board "start training for an ironman" as one of my goals.
Within a week, I was home bound where the real challenges began.

My recovery story really is a struggle of living with the unthinkable every day The accident traumatized me.
I should be dead.
So, how have I reacted to unthinkable trauma?
I got pretty acute post-traumatic stress.
I felt sad, depressed, and helpless.
Sleep evaded me.
I plunged down into a downward spiral of depression, hopelessness, and anxiety.
When I could start driving again, I would drive to the scene of the accident and sit the car crying over and over.
The pain damaged my mental state. .
It never really goes away no matter how well-adjusted I became.
It remains a lingering open wound.

Oddly, PTSD hit the hardest as my physical recovery improved and my medical help stopped six months after the accident.
My orthopedic specialists gave me approval to start strenuous exercising.
My shoulder blade was healing nicely.
I was able to lift my arm close to 80% range.
I stopped my physical therapy shortly thereafter.
I needed to own my recovery.
Driving home after my last physical therapy, I cried in joy.
I would be able to achieve the goal I wrote on the pain chart in hospital to return to my Ironman training.
I cried out "I am Ironman tough" over and over.
I felt the world was mine to conquer.
Tears of joy.

Then the nasty side of PTSD struck and it struck hard.
The silent killer rose its ugly head.
I became depressed.
I wanted to be alone.
I snapped at anything or person who caused me stress.
It was ugly.
At home, I hid this from my family.
I barely slept 2-3 hours each night.
I had been sleeping on couches and chairs due to the physical discomfort in my shoulder and ribs.
Now, anxiety and flashbacks jerked me awake.
I distracted myself with my family history, sometimes devoting 3-4 hours in the middle of the night.
I was drifting in a PTSD river filled with traumatized memories, emotions, and fears.
Like other times in my life, I floated away from reality.

I felt lost.
I did not know what to do and whom could help.
Several psychologists listened, yet just did not get it.
I just needed some people to talk to.
I realized I needed a support group.

What I found was a network of trauma survivors.
On Wednesday May 18, Memorial Hermann Life Flight posted on Facebook information on National Trauma Survivor day.
Within a few weeks, I had two phone discussions with other trauma survivors and counselors from the American Trauma Society.
When we talked, I instinctively felt they got it.
I understood them.
They understood me.
For the first time, I felt relieved that I was experiencing typical PTSD responses.
I finally found some compassionate understanding.
I realized I was living with a new norm.
There was no going back.

My hope for the future began to return.
I began taking almost daily PTSD self-assessments to track my improvements.
My physician confirmed the severity with a military PTSD assessment of PTSD.
I attended a Church retreat to center my life back in religion.
I openly cried in front of a counselor for the first time.

I had turned a corner.
Eighteen months after the accident, I completed the Austin Half-Marathon.
As I struggled with cramping left legs and pulsating rib pain, I pause on top of hill and struggled with the choice should I drop out or should I just take one step at a time and complete the race.
I thought of the man who helped me as laid in pool of blood, I thought of Nurse G, and my physical therapist Camile.
I couldn’t quit, I could finish.
I did finish, after which I just hugged my wife whispering "I did it."

The struggle since then continues as I have grown to accept the these triggers, night terrors, and physical pains are just part of my new norm.

Why did you want to get involved with the TSN program?
Or Why do you want to share your story with other survivors/loved ones?


My passion to help others by sharing my story is that I want to be like the two individuals who sparked hope and optimism during a bleak time in my life.
PTSD is something I live with every day, and the way I have learned to cope with may be a seed that can help others.



####
document number 9: 
2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami: Facts, FAQs, and how to help







Days after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, a man in Banda Aceh, Indonesia, scavenged the rubble for usable items.
In Indonesia’s Aceh province on the island of Sumatra, about 170,000 people were killed by the massive ocean waves.
(©2005 World Vision/photo by Jon Warren)





A powerful undersea earthquake that struck off the coast of Sumatra island, Indonesia, set off the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, also known as the Christmas or Boxing Day tsunami, on Sunday morning, Dec.
26, 2004.
The magnitude 9.1 quake ruptured a 900-mile stretch of fault line where the Indian and Australian tectonic plates meet.
It was a powerful megathrust quake, occurring where a heavy ocean plate slips under a lighter continental plate.

The quake caused the ocean floor to suddenly rise by as much as 40 meters, triggering a massive tsunami.
Within 20 minutes of the earthquake, the first of several 100-foot waves hit the shoreline of Banda Aceh, killing more than 100,000 people and pounding the city into rubble.
Then, in succession, tsunami waves rolled over coastlines in Thailand, India, and Sri Lanka, killing tens of thousands more.
Eight hours later and 5,000 miles from its Asian epicenter, the tsunami claimed its final casualties on the coast of South Africa.
In all, nearly 230,000 people were killed, making it one of the deadliest disasters in modern history.

Since the 2004 tsunami, governments and aid groups have prioritized disaster risk reduction and preparedness.
Only three weeks after the tsunami, representatives of 168 nations agreed to the Hyogo Framework for Action, which paved the way for global cooperation for disaster risk reduction.
Since then, ocean floor earthquake sensors have been installed to trigger early warnings, and many local communities have been trained in evacuation and disaster response.

Major earthquakes and tsunamis in August and September 2018 have tested Indonesia’s ability to respond and recover.
Then, in December 2018, Anak Krakatau volcano’s ongoing eruptions in the Sunda Strait caused undersea landslides that triggered a tsunami that struck beaches in both Sumatra and Java.
With no warning triggered by the volcanic activity, more than 400 people died.
Now, the Indonesian government is working to add volcano sensors to its warning systems.

When disaster strikes, World Vision is there.
Help us respond to disasters like earthquakes and tsunamis.


FAQs: What you need to know about the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami


Explore facts and frequently asked questions about the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, and learn how you can help survivors of disasters.

Fast facts: 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami


The Sumatra-Andaman earthquake, which caused the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, is estimated to have released energy equivalent to 23,000 Hiroshima-type atomic bombs.


In Banda Aceh, the landmass closest to the quake’s epicenter, tsunami waves topped 100 feet.


The tsunami’s waves traveled across the Indian Ocean at 500 mph, the speed of a jet plane.


The 2004 Indonesia earthquake caused a shift in the Earth’s mass that changed the planet’s rotation.


Total material losses from the tsunami were estimated at $10 million.



How many people died in the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami?


Nearly 230,000 people died in the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, making it one of the deadliest disasters in modern history.

Why was the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami so destructive and deadly?


The first giant waves from the Indian Ocean tsunami reached Banda Aceh, a city of about 300,000 people within 15 or 20 minutes after the earthquake.
Few residents of the densely populated area realized that the earthquake they had felt could cause a tsunami, and there was little time to flee to higher ground.

Traveling as fast as 500 mph, the waves spread out to distant countries including Thailand, Sri Lanka, and India.
With no warning, coastal populations were caught by the pounding waves.
Many families that made their living fishing lost everything; whole communities were wiped out by the tsunami.

©2005 image courtesy of the U.S. Geological Survey


Where did the earthquake hit?


The Sumatra-Andaman earthquake struck 150 miles from the coast of Sumatra island, on the northwest of the Indonesian island group, and 31 miles below the ocean floor.
The quake occurred along a fault line between the Indian tectonic plate and the Burma microplate, part of the Australian plate.
The Indian plate is a heavy ocean plate, and it slipped under the lighter coastal plate, rupturing a 900-mile length of the fault.

Indonesia lies between the Pacific Ring of Fire, where 90% of earthquakes occur, and the second-most active seismic zone, the Alpide belt.

How big was the earthquake that caused the Indian Ocean tsunami?


The earthquake’s magnitude was measured between 9.1 and 9.3, making it the third-most powerful quake since 1900.
Magnitude is a measure of the release of energy at the earthquake’s source.

In the worst-affected areas, the quake’s intensity rated IX on the Mercalli scale, the second highest rating possible.
So the quake caused violent shaking and extensive damage to even well-built buildings.
Earthquake intensity is based on observation and varies in different places.

How can I help people affected by earthquakes and tsunamis?


Give: Donate to World Vision’s disaster relief fund to bring help when another disaster strikes.


Pray: Join us in praying for families as they recover and rebuild after earthquakes and other disasters:

Almighty Father, we ask for Your caring mercy on people hard hit by natural disasters, including earthquakes and tsunamis.
In the midst of their struggle to recover, give them patience, peace, and hope that their lives will continue to improve.



How did World Vision help people recover from the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami?


In response to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, World Vision mounted its largest-ever relief response across five countries simultaneously — Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, India, and Myanmar — and raised more than $350 million.

World Vision focused on the needs of children, families, and their communities, with programs to provide protection, healthcare, education, and livelihoods.
We provided training and employment opportunities to 40,000 people, child-rights awareness sessions for more than 27,000 people, educational support for more than 2,000 teachers and 137,000 children, and implemented community-level disaster risk reduction programs.

World Vision built 12,000 homes, 200 Child-Friendly Spaces, 84 schools, 60 playgrounds, and 27 health clinics.
We built roads, bridges, farms, factories, marketplaces, boat-building centers, and restored a fishing harbor.
Our coastal restoration programs included planting 56,000 mangroves to serve as a natural barrier to rising ocean levels.

Most tsunami-related rehabilitation work was completed by 2007.
Today, World Vision’s expansive child sponsorship, health, education, water, food, agriculture, and income-generating activities are found across each of the tsunami-affected countries.

How does World Vision help people prepare for disasters?


World Vision pre-positions relief supplies and trains staff for emergency work in areas like child protection, relief supply chain management, clean water provision, and more.
In disaster-prone communities where we work, we organize programs to reduce risks from disasters and train local first responders.

In nearly 100 countries around the world, World Vision works to improve the lives of children and families and to help them prepare for and recover from disasters.

2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami timeline


7:58 a.m.: A magnitude 9.1 earthquake occurs off the northwest coast of Sumatra.


+15 minutes: The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii registers the quake.


+20 to 30 minutes: Tsunami waves more than 100 feet high pound the Banda Aceh coast, killing about 170,000 people and destroying buildings and infrastructure.


+1.5 hours: Beaches in southern Thailand are hit by the tsunami.
Among the 5,400 who died were 2,000 foreign tourists.


+2 hours: The tsunami strikes the Sri Lankan coastline from the northeast and all around the southern tip; more than 30,000 people are dead or missing.
The east coast of India is hard hit from Chennai south; more than 16,000 people are killed.


+8 hours: The tsunami reaches the east coast of Africa, killing more than 300 people in Somalia, Tanzania, and Kenya.



Learn more about earthquakes and tsunamis, which are among the most damaging and deadly disasters.



####
document number 10: 
South Florida Supplies Being Sent For Bahamas Disaster Relief






####
document number 11: 
Kerala floods: Centre firm on no-aid policy but may allow funds under ‘schemes’


Student volunteers manage and take stock of packed relief material for flood victims at a relief material collection centre in Trivandrum, Kerala.
(AFP Photo)


India is unlikely to change its 15-year-old policy of not accepting bilateral financial assistance for rescue and relief operations, an official familiar with the development said, even as a reported offer by the United Arab Emirates of Rs 700 crore for flood relief in Kerala has acquired political undertones.

India may, however, not be averse to treating some offers as "humanitarian aid or reconstruction plans under other schemes", the people indicated.
The details of the schemes could be worked out later, the people added.

Late on Tuesday, the crown prince of Abu Dhabi Mohammed bin Zayed bin Sultan Al-Nahyanon tweeted that he had spoken to Prime Minister Narendra Modi about the devastation caused by the floods in Kerala.
"My sincere condolences to the families of the victims.
We stand with the Indian people.
Our relief and charitable institutions are helping with relief efforts," he had added.

The official cited above said Indian embassies have been told to "politely reiterate" to any host country that makes any offer of bilateral relief for the Kerala floods that it was against India’s policy to accept such aid.

"Informally informed with regret that GOI (Government of India) is not accepting overseas donations for Kerala flood relief.
Our hearts are with you people of Bharat," Chutintorn Gongsakdi, Thailand’s envoy to India said in a tweet on Wednesday, indicating that Thailand had made a similar offer.
He did not specify the amount that had been offered.

A second official explained that there are "norms laid down in practice" going back a decade-and-a-half on receiving for aid for relief.
"GOI doesn’t accept bilateral aid for relief.
There are humanitarian aid, which is different from this, or certain projects that are taken up later with external funding in these areas.
This is something on which the government takes an appropriate call at a later stage," said the official, who asked not to be named.

The national disaster management plan, adopted in May 2016, makes almost the same point.

"As a matter of policy, Government of India doesn’t issue appeal for foreign assistance in the wake of a disaster.
If the national government of another country voluntarily offers assistance as a goodwill gesture in solidarity with disaster victims, the Central government may accept the offer.
The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India is required to coordinate with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), which is primarily responsible for reviewing foreign offers of assistance," a section of the plan reads.

Watch: Lucknow citizens ‘Stand with Kerala’, organise camps to collect funds


Congress leader AK Antony on Wednesday asked the Modi government to rewrite the rules so that financial support can come from abroad for flood-hit Kerala.
"If the rule was changed by the previous government, I have no qualms to say that the Modi government should rewrite it," Antony said.

"With the present rule, it may not be possible to accept the $100 million announced by the UAE government for Kerala.
So change the rules," he said.

Former foreign secretary Lalit Mansingh, who was a joint secretary in the finance ministry and prepared a note in this regard at the time, said: "The policy of not receiving aid was deliberated in detail first when Jaswant Singh was the finance minister under the NDA government.
It was like this — too many countries were offering small aid.
All these aids came with stringent conditions and compliance and monitoring reports, and it was too cumbersome for the money that was coming in."

But, Mansingh asserted, there has always been a ‘humanitarian assistance’ discretion that the government can use in dealing with aid on a case-by-case basis.

Late on Wednesday night, in the wake of the offers, the MEA spokesperson said India deeply appreciated offers from several countries, including from foreign governments, to assist in relief and rehabilitation efforts after the tragic floods.
"In line with the existing policy, the Government is committed to meeting the requirements for relief and rehabilitation through domestic efforts.
Contributions to the Prime Minister’s Relief Fund and the Chief Minister’s Relief Fund from NRIs, PIOs and international entities such as foundations would, however, be welcome."



####
document number 12: 
President Trump, White House, Speaker Pelosi discussed on Mark Arum


Automatic TRANSCRIPT

Senate

disaster aid funding.

Jamie Duprey

in

Washington

ending months of gridlock, congress, and

President Trump

have agreed to nineteen billion dollars in disaster relief as President Trump backed away from his opposition to extra aid for

Puerto Rico

, the agreement will mean new relief for victims of hurricanes floods and wildfires as well as money to rebuild damaged military bases in

Florida Brassica North Carolina

, in about three billion of nineteen billion amount would go to farmers, hard hit by storms last year, including those in south west

Georgia

, President Trump today at the

White House

also announcing he wants another sixteen billion dollars for aid to go to

America

n farmers that offset losses.
He says from the trade war with China.
Sixteen billion funds will help keep cherish farms, thriving and make clear that no country has veto on America's economic and national security, but there was much more from the White House events than just that, that in just a moment right now.
Eighty three degrees on Peachtree street, upper sixty to low seventies for the overnight, then tomorrow's ninety three to reach near record high even warmer for the weekend

Mattis

, most accurate and dependable forecast is coming up.
We check your drive here, this Thursday, end of rush.
Here is Mike shields incident formation on the

WSB

jam Cam, Egger crash just cleared out of all lanes.
Everything back opened five seventy five southbound before sixes road exit number eleven silky and tough delays leaving Holly springs towards Woodstock more minutes on WSB family on his name station, staff would have an intervention for the better the country.
Some of what house speaker

Nancy

Pelosi said today of the president, in response president now, questioning house speaker, Nancy, Pelosi's, mental health, crazy Nancy.
I tell you what I've been.
Watching her and suggesting she's unfit for the job.
She's lost it Mr. Trump at the White House insisting there is nothing wrong with him or how he governs, then very consistent.
I'm an extremely stable genius.

Speaker Pelosi

tweeting back that quote, when the extremely stable genius starts acting more presidential.
She'll be happy to work with him.
Andy Field,

ABC

news..



####
document number 13: 
Civil Trial Against BP Seeks To Place Blame For Gulf Oil Spill


AUDIE CORNISH, HOST:

From NPR News, this is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.
I'm Audie Cornish.

Today in New Orleans, a civil trial began in the case of the BP explosion and oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
The disaster happened almost three years ago, April 2010.
Millions of barrels of oil poured into the Gulf, 11 workers were killed.
BP has already pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
Now, billions of dollars are at stake in these civil proceedings.

NPR's Jeff Brady was in the courtroom today and he joins us now.
And, Jeff, to start, opening statements, what did you hear?

JEFF BRADY, BYLINE: Well, it was just opening statements and just kind of highlighting what attorneys plan to argue in this case.
More than six hours of opening statements from eight different parties, starting with lawyers for the plaintiffs.
That's the federal government, the five Gulf Coast states affected and a group representing thousands of individual plaintiffs.
Their message was fairly uniform, that BP and its contractors put profit before safety and the environment.

They planned to argue that managers knew the crew on the Deepwater Horizon didn't have enough training, that equipment was faulty and that means the disaster could have been prevented.
Now, the defense has countered those arguments, but then just as we've heard kind of all along leading up to this trial, they pointed fingers at each other.

The owner of the rig, Transocean, essentially said that this was BP's fault.
It was the operator of the well.
That means that BP was in charge and that Transocean employees were victims here, too.
The lawyer for Halliburton, which did the cement job for the well, said it was BP and Transocean's fault for losing control of the well.
BP's lawyer said rather than pointing fingers in the trial, they'll be pointing to facts.
So, nice little one-liner there.
The company has argued all along that this was a series of mistakes that lead to the disaster that killed 11 crewmen and that massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.

CORNISH: And, Jeff, I want you to tell us a little more about settlement, because there had been a lot of talk about a settlement but I guess that didn't happen?

BRADY: No.
It didn't happen.
They've been negotiating over the past year.
BP has been talking with the Department of Justice and the states affected.
And we've heard that those negotiations continued through last night.
I'm surprised that it wasn't settled today.
I can't imagine the BP executives want all these events rehashed in the media again.

But they maintain the company was not grossly negligent, and that's the big question here.
They say they're ready to prove that.
You know, that could be the company's strategy for settlement negotiations.
You know, make it seem like they have a good case and get the plaintiffs to agree to a smaller settlement.
We don't know what their strategy is.
Maybe the trial will play out and the judge will decide the case, or maybe this will be settled.

CORNISH: And as we mentioned, BP already pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
It's paying $4.5 billion in fines.
So explain to us how this case is different from that one.

BRADY: Well, this is about what happened leading up to that explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon and who's responsible for it.
Allocating liability.
That's a term we hear a lot in this phase of the case.
And, boy, you know, there is a lot of money at stake here.
Under the Clean Water Act, up to $17.5 billion in fines that BP could be subject to.
That's a little lower than originally thought, actually, because both sides agreed to exclude about 810,000 barrels of oil that was collected at the blowout site.
But we're still talking tens of billions of dollars.

CORNISH: And a few seconds left here, Jeff.
What happens next?
Is this trial going to go on for a long time?

BRADY: You know, it's always hard to predict how long these trials are going to go on for.
But the folks who are involved here, the lawyers predict about three months.
So we could be well into May here before this trial wraps up.

CORNISH: NPR's Jeff Brady, joining us from New Orleans.
Jeff, thank you.

BRADY: Thank you, Audie.

Copyright © 2013 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 14: 
Supporting Hurricane Matthew Relief in Haiti


​Joint Task Force-Matthew supported the critical, early stages of U.S. disaster assistance to Haiti led by USAID.
U.S. military forces delivered more than 600,000 pounds of aid to areas devastated by Hurricane Matthew.

U.S. service members stack boxes of aid which and water while off loading a U.S. Army CH-47 Chinook during an aid relief mission Oct.
14, 2016 in Anse d'Hainault, Haiti.
Haiti was devastated by hurricane Matthew which killed more than 800 people.
Joint Task Force Matthew is a comprised of multinational partners who are working together to provide and bring aid to those in need in Haiti.
(U.S. Air Force photo by Staff Sgt.
Paul Labbe)



####
document number 15: 
Las Vegas casino workers vote to authorize strike


Las Vegas Sands Corp.
will continue to offer its employees pay and benefits through at least Oct.
31.


Total revenue for the Caesars Entertainment Inc.-affiliated company was $257.9 million, up 17 percent compared with the same period last year.


Gaming win rebounds from April, May, but still short of normal

The state Gaming Control Board reported a 45.5 percent decline in win from June 2019 with the Strip off 61.4 percent.


"Circa’s going to have a lot of different hangs," co-owner Derek Stevens said as he announced six new venues at the hotel.


The economic recovery from the pandemic will look a lot different than recoveries from other financial calamities, including 9/11 and 1 October.


Nevada casino regulators have opened more than 150 cases over noncompliance with health and safety policies and, among that tally, filed three formal complaints, officials said Tuesday.


President and CEO Keith Smith the company has been off to an "excellent start" since reopenings began.


Many Las Vegas room rates are below pre-pandemic levels in an effort to attract more visitors, but pricing has held steadier compared with many other markets.


The Tropicana is up for grabs — in a business climate that was unthinkable not long ago.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = search rescue
document number 1: 
Search and rescue team helps injured hiker off Mt.
Olympus



SALT LAKE CITY — A Salt Lake County Search and Rescue team helped an injured hiker off Mount Olympus Tuesday night.

According to aFacebook post, crews were called out around 7:30 p.m.

A man had hiked up the Mount Olympus trail and at some point tried to take a different route to the summit.

The man slipped and fell around 15 feet near the summit and injured his back.

He was able to call 911.

A SAR team was sent up the main trail and six other members prepared to possibly be flown with equipment to the summit by the Department of Public Safety helicopter.

DPS did a fly over to locate the patient before dark and determined that they could hoist the patient off the mountain.

The patient was flown to the Mount Olympus trailhead and transported to a local hospital.

All other SAR members got off the mountain around 10 p.m.



####
document number 2: 
Missing Murrieta man found wandering in San Pasqual canyon


(Courtesy Jeannie Freeman)

Thomas Freeman, 63, is in hospital after being found wandering in the North Clevenger Trail canyon, eight days after being reported missing by his wife Jeannie and after his car was found crashed and abandoned in the trailhead parking area on the canyon’s edge.


A hiker found Thomas Freeman apparently lost near a North Clevenger Trail canyon.
He was taken to a hospital.

March 28: Eight days after his wife reported him missing from his Murrietta home, Thomas Freeman was found alive Saturday after calling out to hikers near the North Clevenger Trail on Rte.
78, six miles outside Ramona.
Freeman, 63, was airlifted out of a steep canyon and taken by ambulance to a hospital.
No information about his condition is available.

Check back for details as more updates are known.


March 25, 2020: The search and rescue operation for Thomas Freeman, a 63-year-old Murrieta resident, flew into action Tuesday morning, four days after his wife, Jeannie, reported him missing on Friday afternoon, March 20.

Hikers returning to the North Clevenger Trailhead staging area on state Route 78, six miles west of Ramona, came across Freeman’s vehicle, crashed and wedged between two boulders on the edge of the steep canyon at the end of the parking area—abandoned with its engine still running.

Around 9:30 a.m. Tuesday, San Diego Police Department’s Airborne Law Enforcement (ABLE) helicopter was first on scene, swooping low into the canyon.

(Continued below)


(Courtesy photo)

Sixty three year-old Thomas Freeman’s vehicle was found crashed between boulders on the canyon edge at the North Clevenger Trailhead, abandoned with its engine still running.


Later Tuesday afternoon, operations coordinators and volunteer teams from San Diego County Sheriff’s Department Search and Rescue (SAR), San Diego Mountain Rescue Team (SDMRT) and the American Red Cross gathered with volunteers, drones and dog teams to begin a coordinated search effort from a command post at the trailhead.

In an exclusive interview with the

Sentinel

, Freeman’s wife, Jeannie, said the situation "has a lot to do with the coronavirus."

Jeannie said that after getting increasingly concerned over COVID-19 and what was happening globally, Freeman on Friday morning began pacing incessantly around their home, repeating over and over that the stock markets are going to crash, everyone is going to lose all their money, and anguishing that it was the end of the world—in a whispery voice, his breathing labored.

"It was completely out of character for Tom," Jeannie said of her husband, a retired attorney and substitute teacher for San Marcos Unified School District.

"I tried to reason with him," she recalls, "saying ‘we’re all gonna be OK.’
I told him ‘Honey, can I take you to the hospital?
What are you feeling and thinking?’
But he couldn’t get the words out and went to our room to lie down."

Jeannie said around 11:30 a.m., she had to head out "to take care of an issue at our old house."
The couple had just moved from Escondido to Murrieta the day before, Thursday, March 19, and, she says were also coping with the general stress of moving.

"When I came home about 2:30, he was gone.
His car was gone, his wallet was gone—but he had left his cell phone at home."

At 9:30 p.m. that evening, "overly worried at his state and that he may be having a nervous breakdown," Jeannie called her best friend, Davona Reed in Escondido, and a close friend who was retired SDPD.

"They told me to call the police and file a missing person’s report, which I did.
Then I didn’t hear anything for two days until Monday, after repeatedly calling and leaving messages with no response."

A teacher in the Escondido Union School District, Jeannie says she realized her school laptop was in her husband’s car and on Monday, school being closed, called the district’s help desk, who "somehow tracked the laptop and said, strangely, it had last been used in Huntington Park, Los Angeles."

Jeannie says they only found out Freeman’s car had been found on SR-78 when, confused by the L.A. location, she called Huntington Park Police Department, who looked up his license plate number and told her it had been impounded in Ramona.

"We called the Ramona tow truck company," unknown at press time, "and the driver told us where he found Tom’s car.
I grabbed my hiking boots and drove out to look for him.
The truck driver met us there and a small group of us hiked down the trails into the canyon—but it’s so huge and thick with brush.

"We couldn’t find him," Jeannie said, sedated but clearly anguished.
"We then went to the tow truck company to look at his car.
All four airbags had gone off, front and sides.
There was no blood, but the window was down, and it was wet inside from the rain."

The tow truck driver told her that when he arrived at the trailhead and found Tom’s car crashed between the boulders on the canyon rim, he called it in, and California Highway Patrol arrived on scene along with a firetruck and SDPD.

Jeannie says her best friend Reed then made hours of calls to Escondido Police Department, SDPD and CHP.
"We kept calling and saying we were worried about the condition Tom was in, but they gave us the runaround and bounced us between departments."

After leaving "lots of messages" with the Murrieta Police Department (MPD) over the weekend of March 21, Jeannie said "Detective Miguel Garcia from MPD finally contacted me on Monday [March 23] and was making calls."
(Detective Garcia could not be reached for comment at the time of reporting.
The missing person flier below incorrectly states his first name as Mario).

She said Detective Garcia interviewed her at her home on Tuesday afternoon, March 24, and took some of her husband’s belongings for his scent for the search dogs and told her the canyon search operation was beginning at the trailhead, including helicopters, drones and search parties on foot.

At the trailhead command post yesterday afternoon (Wednesday, March 25)—after the

Sentinel

saw Jeannie’s missing person flier on Ramona Facebook pages but no media coverage and spoke with her exclusively—Sgt.
Daniel Vengler with Search and Rescue confirmed the operation had begun around 4 p.m. on Tuesday, continuing until 11 p.m. when the combination of darkness, rain and steep terrain made the "risk versus reward" of the search continuing unsafe.

(Continued below)


(Nikki Bridges)

A team of Search and Rescue volunteers (center) heads back up North Clevenger Trail, six to the trail head command post.
Teams are searching the canyon and up to and over the far ridge summit and back for missing Murrieta man Thomas Freeman, 63, missing for six days.


San Diego Mountain Rescue Operations Leader Dennis Peck (whose volunteers train in harsh winter conditions and are called in by SAR when search areas involve difficult terrain, high elevations, and/or severe weather conditions), said on Tuesday around 50 searchers across both agencies were deployed down into the canyon, along the creek water and up the opposite side to the summit, over and back, searching off-trail deep into the thick brush.

Peck said drones where flown close up to rock faces and around the giant boulders that dot the canyon, investigating overhangs and crevices, and were brought back Wednesday to keep looking, while around 30 volunteers continued to search on foot.

Asked what clues they were looking for, SAR Sgt.
Vengler said, "Anytime we do a search we’re grasping at straws, looking for any clue the person may leave behind—a shoe, clothing, dropped wallet…anything that tells us they were here."

Peck said "Ultimately we’re hoping to find Tom alive.
But the POD—Probability of Detection, which we calculate taking many variables into consideration, including conditions, terrain, weather, age, length of time missing—is low, only about 10 percent, and the situation is not producing results."

(Continued below)


(Nikki Bridges)

The command post at North Clevenger Trailhead on Rte.
78, where operations leaders from San Diego Search and Rescue (SAR) and San Diego Mountain Rescue are deploying volunteer SAR teams in the search for Thomas Freeman, missing for 6 days.


He underscored that while the search continues, detectives are researching other possible leads, including looking at the vehicle’s computer system and any credit card usage.

As to whether Freeman was in L.A., Jeannie, for one, believes the help desk report of her laptop "pinging there" was a mistake, but is grateful the call to Huntington Park police led her to the tow truck company in Ramona.

While Detective Garcia had not returned calls at the time of this writing, Vengler at the command post said, "The current working theory is that [Freeman] drove the car here himself, but there is nothing in the car that either confirms or denies he was in it, so additional theories are likely being considered."

At the spot where Freeman’s car was recovered, Vengler pointed to fresh earth displacement under a very large boulder sitting precariously on the cliff edge.
"The impact of a vehicle—could be his or perhaps the tow truck, we don’t know—was forceful enough to dislodge and move the boulder."

The vehicle was found with driver side damage and the door against the boulder, leaving the only exit through the passenger side door, which would have opened directly onto the canyon edge.

(Continued below)


Asked how she was doing Wednesday evening, her voice breaking with emotion, Freeman’s wife Jeannie said:

"I’m torn between my heart wanting to believe someone found him disoriented on the road and picked him up, and the other part of my heart thinking it’s been too long.
It’s a roller coaster.
There are moments I’m angry and crying, then I’m drained and numb."

Thomas Freeman is 5 feet 8 inches and weighs approximately 175 pounds.
He was last seen wearing black long sleeves, blue jeans and gray or white shoes.
He may also be wearing a black leather jacket.
If you witnessed anything or have any information, contact Detective Miguel Garcia, Murrieta Police Department, 951-461-6362, or email help.find.tom.now@gmail.com.


Editor’s note: This article will be updated as more information is known.

(Courtesy Jeannie Freeman)

Search and Rescue continues for missing Murrieta man, Thomas Freeman, 63, distraught over the global corona virus situation, whose abandoned care was found crashed on a canyon edge on Rte.
78 six miles outside Ramona by hikers March 20 with its engine still running.



####
document number 3: 
Rowlett, TX tornado search and rescue






####
document number 4: 
Death toll from Japan quakes rises to 44, as search and rescue efforts continue







####
document number 5: 
'Seinfeld' Actor Charles Levin Believed to Be Dead After Human Remains Found



Charles Levin, a character actor who had appeared on TV shows including

Seinfeld, Night Court

and

NYPD Blue

, is believed to be dead after human remains were found in Southern Oregon.

Charles‘ son reported the 70-year-old missing earlier this month, and the Grants Pass Department of Public Safety conducted a search.

"On Friday, July 12th Josephine County Search and Rescue was able to narrow down a search area based on an emergency cellular phone ping requested by GPDPS," the department said in a statement.
"At about 8:00 PM on Saturday, a local…resident located Charles Levin‘s car in a very remote and almost impassible road.
Troopers from the Oregon State Police responded and were escorted to the car by the individual who found it.
Levin’s car was off the roadway and was disabled due to terrain."

"Levin was not in his car, or in the immediate proximity of his vehicle," but police said they found his pug deceased in the vehicle.
"Assisted by the responding Troopers, personnel conducted a grid search of the very steep and rugged terrain.
After several hours of searching, human remains were located.
Based on the circumstances, there is a high probability that the remains are those of Charles Levin."

Our thoughts are with Charles‘ loved ones during this time.




####
document number 6: 
Burnaby search and rescue team find missing Canadians in the Bahamas



We told you yesterday that a team of search-and-rescue volunteers from the Burnaby Fire Department have helped find one of three missing Canadians in the Bahamas.

We’re just learning some good news about the other two Canadians who had been missing - and here to tell us more is Jeff Clark, President of the Local 323 at the Burnaby Firefighters Association.

Guest: Jeff Clark

President of the Local 323 at the Burnaby Firefighters Association



####
document number 7: 
Former Deadliest Catch Star Rescued After Fishing Boat Capsized, 5 Others Feared Dead


A crab boat capsized off the coast of Alaska Tuesday with five people missing and two survivors, including a former member of the Discovery Channel show

Deadliest Catch

.


The crabbing vessel — called the

Scandies Rose

— was carrying loads of crabbing pots to kick off the winter season and was traveling in an area with unsafe weather conditions, according to the Associated Press.

There were reportedly warnings of strong winds and heavy freezing spray, however, the boat continued to depart from Dutch Harbor and sail south.



According to the AP, the 130-foot boat was last seen 170 miles southwest of Kodiak Island and sank around 10 p.m. Tuesday.

The Coast Guard launched rescue efforts after the ship sent a mayday distress call, and they arrived around 2 a.m. Wednesday to search for survivors.

While using helicopters, planes and boats to search for the missing crewmembers, rescuers noticed a faint light in a life raft in the distance, which is where the two surviving men were discovered, Anchorage Daily News reported.

Former

Deadliest Catch

member Dean Gribble Jr. and John Lawler were found on the boat, both suffering from hypothermia but have since been released from the hospital, according to the AP

.


A representative from Discovery Channel did not immediately reply to PEOPLE’s request for comment.

The Coast Guard has identified the five missing men as the boat’s captain, Gary Cobban Jr., the captain’s son, David Lee Cobban, Arthur Ganacias, Brock Rainey and Seth Rousseau-Gano, the AP reported.

The 20-hour long search for the other crewmembers was called off late Wednesday evening as it was presumed they did not survive.

An investigation as to what caused the boat to sink is underway.
As of Friday, details of the cause have yet to be released as talking to survivors is a crucial part of the Coast Guard’s research.



####
document number 8: 
All 4 Crew Members Rescued From Overturned Ship Off Georgia Coast


In this image released by the U.S. Coast Guard, a helicopter hovers over the overturned Golden Ray cargo vessel in St.
Simons Sound, Ga., on Monday.
Twenty of the 24 people on board had been rescued as of Sunday afternoon, when crews were forced to suspend the search because of safety concerns related to a fire on the ship.


Updated at 6:40 p.m. ET

The U.S. Coast Guard says it has rescued the fourth and final crew member from an overturned car carrier vessel in waters off the coast of Brunswick, Ga., after reporting earlier in the day that all but one had been pulled to safety.

In a tweet Monday evening, the Coast Guard's 7th District Southeast, located in Miami, tweeted that "All crew members are accounted for.
Operations now shift fully to environmental protection, removing the vessel and resuming commerce."


Earlier Monday, Capt.
John Reed, Commander of Coast Guard Sector Charleston, said at a news conference he had "outstanding news to report."

"Three of the four survivors aboard the Golden Ray have been extracted from the space," Reed said.
"The fourth survivor has been located and its an ongoing operation to try to get him out."

Rescue crews had been working since Sunday to locate the missing crew members after the Golden Ray became disabled and eventually overturned in St.
Simons Sound, about 80 miles south of Savannah, Ga.

Emergency responders were notified shortly after 2 a.m. ET Sunday that a ship was disabled and "listing heavy" to its port side.
A total of 23 crew members and a pilot were on the vessel at the time, and 20 people had been rescued from the ship Sunday, Coast Guard officials said.

On Monday, the 7th District Southeast said in a tweet around 12:45 p.m. ET: "All 4 #GoldenRay crew members are confirmed alive.
Conditions unknown.
Response crews will drill a hole to deliver supplies."

Reed says once the initial 3-inch hole was drilled into the hull of the ship, food and fresh water were passed to the three that were eventually pulled out.
Getting fresh air to them was also key, he said.

None of the names of the survivors were released.

Reed added the three survivors rescued earlier Monday were doing relatively well for having spent more than 30 hours inside the upturned vessel.
All three were being treated at a local hospital.
At least two were "very ambulatory" and able to walk under their own power, Reed added.

U.S. Coast Guard crews and port partners respond to a disabled cargo vessel with a fire on board Sunday in St.
Simons Sound, off the coast of Brunswick, Ga.


Temperatures in Brunswick were in the 90s Monday, but with 80% humidity, temperatures felt hotter than 100 degrees.
Reed estimates temperatures inside the vessel "were probably pushing 120 [degrees] or more."

Hours before the announcement that three of the missing crew had been brought to safety, the Coast Guard said on Twitter that rescue workers were making extraction plans after contacting the crew trapped aboard the the 656-foot vehicle carrier.

The message included short videos of salvage crews appearing to puncture the hull of the ship.

A fire on the ship temporarily suspended rescue operations on Sunday afternoon.

"As smoke and flames began to appear, our crews ... assessed the situation was too risky to further go inside the vessel to attempt to locate the four individuals who remain missing at this time," Reed said Sunday.

Investigators are still working to determine what caused the ship, which is sailing under the flag of the Marshall Islands, to overturn.

Investigators say along with the rescue operation, they are also working on pollution mitigation operations and how to bring the massive car carrier's hull upright.

"The next step will really be to drill down on stability of the vessel and to refine a solid plan for righting the vessel," said Cmdr.
Norm Witt, who leads the Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit Savannah.



####
document number 9: 
Watch the Amazing Rescue of Big Wave Surfer Alex Botelho at the Nazaré Tow Surfing Challenge



Surfing at Nazaré when the waves get outrageously big is unlike surfing at other big wave spots.
There’s no channel to kick out into at Nazaré, so nearly every ride requires a ski assist.
Tow teams depend on each other to save each other’s lives, but every so often, something goes wrong that simply can’t be avoided.
Such was the case at the Nazaré Tow Surfing Challenge on Tuesday.

If you were watching the event, you might have been more than a little curious.
With just a few minutes to go in the final heat, and just moments after the safety coordinator was onscreen talking about the dangers of surfing Nazaré, Alex Botelho and Hugo Vau ran into a huge amount of trouble.
It is terrifying footage.
The live feed was cut off and many viewers were left wondering what exactly happened.
Botelho could be seen floating face down in the water as a rescue swimmer frantically fought through the surging whitewater to reach him.
Once he was on the beach, his unconscious body was loaded onto a spine board.
And then it was hours until any update came.

"We’re happy to report that Alex remains stable.
He is currently in the hospital under close observation for the next 48/72 hours,"the WSL wrote.
"We are all wishing Alex a full and quick recovery.
"He will stay at the hospital for further evaluation."

Advertisement



While at the time of this reporting there are no additional details, what can be said for certain is that the water safety team on-site at the Nazaré Tow Surfing Challenge very likely saved Alex Botelho’s life.
The work they do to keep the surfers safe is incredibly important.
There are inherent dangers with surfing waves of this size, but the men and women on the rescue crews are some of the most highly trained and experienced people in the world for this particular venture.
And for that, we should all be grateful, because without them, the first-ever Nazaré Tow Surfing Challenge could have ended in tragedy.

Only the best.
We promise.

Join our community of contributors.

Apply



####
document number 10: 
My complete experience getting into FPV drone building and flying (DJI only)



My story from knowing nothing about FPV drones to my first flight.
Entire build and ideas behind it.

Firstly my previous hobby's and work do consist around being an electrician, having soldering experience and building other electronic items.
I have had no experience in building or buying any FPV drone related items.
I do own a DJI Mavic Pro drone which has nothing to do with FPV drone flying.
For the rest of the post I will refer to FPV drone builds and flying as "FPV"

This story is mainly for information purposes, to see if I can help others who might have had the same questions I had.

I first had seen FPV drones on Aliexpress, somewhere I had spent a fair bit of time on.
I had bought many electronics on there which had all come in the post and nothing was ever broken.
I still to this date, have had no real issue on there.
I had seen a drone called the Eachine X220s which is an analog camera drone.
At the time I was not even aware of the difference between analog and digital camera builds.
I began searching YouTube videos and quickly had seen videos so pixelated when flying I was immediately put off from trying to build a drone.
Pictured below is a screenshot I found of the Eachine X220s with an analog camera.
I found a video which clearly represents the issues I would not have put up with.
The VHS Tape experience was not one I was willing to accept while spending this kind of money.

Eachine X220s analog camera


Analog video on the left — digital video on the right


From seeing Analog only videos I decided not to pursue the hobby for almost a year.
I then ran into FPV videos which appeared with near clear quality in comparison like it was recorded from a phone or Gopro.
I immediately realized that they all had the DJI FPV camera system and that there is currently nothing else like it on the market.
I searched for the price of the DJI FPV googles and Airunit "AU" (camera and transmitter unit) Not to my surprise I had found that the goggles and AU were fairly expensive when taking into the consideration the cost of an Eachine X220s drone.

I knew what I must do, like all projects I build.
I began part picking, researching and building an extensive price list of parts and items I would eventually need to get into the hobby of FPV drones.
My main goal was to build something between middle and high quality.
I thought If I am going to spend money, I might as well build something worth while.
I started putting the price list together and quickly found out that the DJI goggles and air unit alone add up to a big chunk of the initial cost.
This itself didn’t bother me as much as I knew at least the goggles wouldn't get damaged as hopefully I wouldn’t break those.

I also learnt fairly on that in the FPV hobby you need spares of almost everything.
Shipping from China was long but now it has been extended even longer.
Up to 2 to 3 months in Sydney, Australia where I live.
The most used size drone build in the FPV world seemed to be 5 inch so that’s what I was going to build.
In relation to which frame I chose there was no specific reason and after asking most people it came down to frame thickness and parts availability.
I chose the frame based on accessible parts mostly.
I had found replacement parts and the frame itself to be very reasonably priced on Aliexpress in comparison to some of the unique models on other FPV shopping sites.
It cost less than half than some of those of the more expensive ones and so I decided to buy 2 full frame sets and 4 extra arms giving me plenty of spares in the event I crash and break something.
(likely) Breaking and repairing the drone appears to be a likely outcome of this hobby.
This is a photo of the drone frame.



GEPRC 5 inch Mark4 HD5 with DJI antenna holders


Next was the size of the motor and the size of the battery I wanted.
I was happy to spend a bit extra now to get the best overall FPV experience so I didn’t have to worry about upgrading later or being disappointing now.
On a 5 inch drone the common choices are 4s batteries or 6s batteries.
I went with 6s.
I was aware that more power would be hard to control, however I would accept the difficult learning curve now and try harder to make it work.
I chose the batteries in the list as they had a good deal, were recommended on the DJI FPV Facebook page and I could not find any negative feed back about them.

The motors I chose because they seemed reasonably priced and I could not find any negative feedback about them.
The Aliexpress page specifically said which version worked with the 6s battery which is the 1700kv.
I could see battery sizes were between 1050mah and 1500mah between the different brands.
This would cause a flight time variation so I knew these would be fine for me to start.
4 batteries was fine for me to get a handle on the hobby.


CNHL 6S 1100mah battery — Emax Eco Series 2306 1700kv


Next I knew I had to match a flight controller, I pretty quickly found the 4 in 1 flight controller which includes everything needed in the one unit.
I thought that was simple so I knew I would use that.
I was unsure what all the numbers and details of the flight controller meant so I began researching what all of the features did and what all of the solder pads on the controller can do.
I started to search for the most expensive flight controller and work my way cheaper to figure out what I didn’t need.
I had found an F4 flight controller and thought that was OK before someone recommended an F7 flight controller.
(F4 flight controller likely would have been fine as well) The differences being in CPU power.
The price difference was minimal and I found the one below.
It met every need I had.
The most important thing other than the F version of the flight controller was a voltage regulator "BEC" (battery eliminating circuit).
A voltage regulator that can turn the battery voltage into a usable voltage for the DJI FPV Air unit "AU" specifically.
The AU only accepts a certain voltage range and a lot of flight controllers do not have built in voltage regulators "BEC’s".
The one I chose has a 9v regulator up to 2 amps which is stated sufficient by the DJI FPV manual.
It was one less thing I needed in the build and one less thing to solder.


Diatone Mamba F722S Flight Controller 4 in 1


After this I started to research fail safe types.
A fail safe being the result of losing remote control of the drone while in flight.
Default fail safe is to drop from the sky.
This has happened to many people in video’s I have seen and it was what I was most concerned about.
I would be a new pilot, I did not want to crash my drone and at worst, completely loose the drone.
I had started to become interested in the longer ranges I could achieve which would make the fail safe mechanism even more important.
I found video’s by Joshua Bardwell (youtube) where he mentioned GPS rescue mode on Betaflight.
I recommend watching those as it was easy to understand.
I knew I had to have GPS and return to home on fail safe so I added GPS modules to the list.
Spares were cheap so I bought 2.
I was aware from the videos I would be required to take control well before it actually got home as the fail safe rescue mode expects you to regain control of the drone before it gets to land.
It appears it does not track back to the pin point location where the drone was armed from however it is certainly better than falling from the sky.

Beitian BN-220 GPS module


I began looking into what controller I was going to buy.
DJI make a controller that works with the DJI FPV Air Unit "AU".
With this I would not need an extra receiver on the drone.
It would save time and effort.
I had quickly seen people running into fail safe issues with the DJI controller builds and became unsure if the signal from the controller and the signal from the goggles were the same quality and strength.
I would have been unhappy if I lost video and it immediately crashed.
I would prefer to control the fail safe rescue mode myself.
I was also unsure how much the existing frequencies in the area like wifi or cell towers might affect the DJI radio frequencies at there strength.
I began looking at other options to weigh up the price of both and found that the TBS CROSSFIRE system was probably the high end of transmitters and receivers on the market.
It was a calculated investment but going along with my initial ideas.
I wanted to invest now so I did not have to worry later.

Again Joshua Bardwelll released a video detailing exactly how the Jumper t16 Pro controller works.
I found that I would need an added TBS CROSSFIRE attachment.
In the bellow photo in the middle is the Crossfire TX Lite and the smaller one on the right is the Crossfire TX Micro.
Both can connect to the Jumper T16 controller.
The differences between the 2 below is the larger one has an RF power of 2w and the smaller TX Micro is RF power 250mw.
250mw I knew was enough but I wanted to future proof.
I got the middle one, the TBS Crossfire TX Lite.
The TBS Crossfire Micro TX is still listed with up to 40km range averaging 15 to 20km and beyond as stated on there web page.
This alone far exceeds the distance the DJI FPV system will do but I was unsure where this hobby will take me.
At worst I am assuming the resale value is good enough to warrant the initial outlay for the Crossfire TX Lite.
The TBS group also make the Crossfire TX which is the exact same as the middle photo "Crossfire TX Lite" but includes Bluetooth.
I decided I did not need bluetooth.
The Crossfire TX Lite settings can be easily altered from inside the colour LCD screened Jumper T16 Controller.
I found a good price at the time for the Crossfire TX Lite so the version with Bluetooth did not warrant the extra cost.



Jumper T16 — TBS Crossfire TX Lite — TBS Crossfire Micro


By now I realized my price list had really started to balloon out and this hobby was not going to be cheap by any means.
I started to look into all the accessories and other parts needed to complete the drone price list.
This included a buzzer for the drone to make it easier to find if it falls somewhere close by, propellers, a battery charger, drone tools and an smart portable battery checker to ensure the batteries are correctly balanced before flying.
Balancing is to ensure that each of the 6 cells in a 6S battery are exactly the same voltage.
I have put some photos in of those items but they could likely be substituted with other items of similar description.
The DJI FPV Goggles also require a certain voltage range with 6s being too high voltage.
4s Batteries seem to be the correct voltage range.






To use the TBS Crossfire TX Lite module you need to pair it with a receiver on the drone itself that also has to be a Crossfire product.
The TBS gear is generally more expensive however it appears to be the top tier in long range gear.
I paired mine with the TBS Crossfire Nano.
Photo below.
This would enable the drone to fly even without video signal.
This would allow me to manually fail-safe the drone while it was flying or choose not to depending on the location.
The fail safe with GPS rescue mode on will likely cause it to either ascend to a predefined level like 100m or level out at the altitude it is at if higher.
I placed my fail safe on 2 switches with 1 of them a momentary switch to enable quick on and of engagement to return home.
Using Crossfire I would feel more comforted knowing that the connection in relation to the control was much stronger than the video connection.
If both the Crossfire and video link fail it would default to GPS rescue mode.

TBS Crossfire Nano





Before I had received any of these items I knew I had had to train myself to fly a drone like this.
This is nothing like flying a DJI Mavic drone and I would need to learn complete new skills.
I am accustomed to learning these type of skills as it is exactly like gaming.

I came across multiple simulators but decided to go with the DRL simulator.
It was reasonably priced and there physics were supposed to be fairly good.
I knew none would be like the real thing but training muscle memory for control of the angles and precise movements of the sticks would still be helpful.

After about 5 hours I recorded a video of my progress using Fraps.
Only allows 30 seconds recording.
I currently am sitting at 12 hours and my flying has already become smoother and I am able to go through small gaps that I would in no way risk in real life.
My method for training is to jump into the freestyle map and try to push the limits of what I think I can do.
I then attempt to redo the things I was unable to do 100s of times.
This usually en-grains something into muscle memory as the next time I jump into the simulator I am usually a small percentage better than I was the previous time.
At 10 hours I felt comfortable enough to fly my drone in an open park to test.
I would never have attempted to fly this drone without attempting a simulator first.
My first few attempts during my first hour resulted in 100s of crashes in a half hour period.
The key is commitment and this hobby requires a lot.
I had done 100s of hours of research, part picking and simulator training before even being able to fly the drone one time.

This is a price list of all of the items I bought which included extras priced in Australia Dollars "AUD".
As you can see to include all the parts and accessories needed for this build it becomes expensive quickly.
I have not added 2 memory cards in this list but likely the total will near $3000.
The GEPRC frame actually comes with 2 battery straps but I wanted better quality ones with anti slip rubber stitching.
It would probably be fine with the ones it comes.


I finally received some propellers and 128gb v30 Sandisk memory cards.
This is the drone in its final form.
It turns out the battery leads were sticking out at a bad angle which clipped the propellers during mid flight while I was testing the fail safe.
Luckily no damage.
I recorded a video of my first ever flight after the 12 hours of DRL flight simulator.


After watching the video its clear that flight in real life is far different than in the simulator the weight, balance and gravity on the drone is just different.
However the simulator at the very least prepared me to keep it balanced somewhat.

At some early stage in the video which was not captured was the fail safe and fall into the ground.
I did not realize till after the flight that the propeller had a slight dent to one of its edges which is why it was likely shaking in some of the video.

Towards the end I clip a power line as well and manage to recover before hitting the ground.
This part felt much like the simulator and I am surprised at the strength of the drone to absorb the impacts.
It also felt much faster than in the game, likely due to the risk of crashing becoming so much more real.
During the video I would say I never maxed out the throttle even once.
At some points I may have punched up to 75%.

For some reason due to the current DJI software I had trouble recording it which is why the last piece is recorded from the goggles with no sound.

In conclusion..
The excitement and risk of flying is what makes this so much fun.
It is nothing like the DRL Flight simulator game.
From the 2 crashes during my first flights I damaged 1 propeller and 1 JST-XH balance battery connector.
These are cheap and easily replaced.
On to practicing.

Thanks.



####
document number 11: 
A Shopping Cart of Hope


How did we deliver more than 3,500 pounds of food and water to an isolated community in central Puerto Rico cut off from the rest of the island due to a collapsed bridge?
The obvious answer is by helicopter, but when the only safe place to land is a mile away from the town and the vehicles needed to transport the supplies are out of gas, what then?

A shopping cart turned out to be the key.

But this was no ordinary shopping cart.
The people of Rio Abajo, a community in Utuado, put their ingenuity to use by creating a pulley system with the cart to span the void left by the collapsed bridge.

The pulley system helps locals ferry supplies across the river in Rio Abajo, Utuado.
(Photo Credit: FEMA Jocelyn Norman)


After identifying the shopping cart as the best way to get the fuel across the river, members of Homeland Security Investigations Special Response Teams loaded the cart with the gasoline and sent it to the other side.
With fuel transported via shopping cart, the residents were able to refuel the vehicles and pick up the pallets of FEMA food and water delivered by the helicopters and transport it back to the community.

The problems affecting the central portion of Puerto Rico were interwoven on every level imaginable.
The 155 mile per hour winds snapped the electrical poles, wood and concrete alike.
Bridges collapsed.
Without electricity, generators powering the water treatment facilities ceased working.
The rainy season worsened road conditions as additional rain brought new mudslides faster than people could clear them.
The mountainous terrain, while beautiful, exacerbated every issue.
Many communities in the region were cut off from food and water distribution points, doctors, family, phone service…from everywhere.

HSI SRT Special Agents unload water in Rio Abajo, Utuado.
(Photo Credit: FEMA Eliud Echevarria)


It was easy to understand why the Central Island Coordination Task Force met three times a day.
Every day at 7 a.m., 2 p.m., and 6:30 p.m., we assembled emergency response workers with specialties in debris removal, sheltering and feeding, medical services, air operations, logistics, and communications; they joined representatives from the Governor’s office, Homeland Security Investigations, Urban Search and Rescue, and the U.S. Army.

Field staff uploaded infrastructure statuses into apps that allowed everyone to see updates in real-time, crucial to identifying new isolated areas.
As teams removed debris, commodities moved by ground.
As mudslides closed the roads, commodities were loaded into helicopters.

Members of the Central Island Task Force return from delivering and distributing commodities in Lares, Puerto Rico.
(Courtesy Photo)


Temporary bridges are in progress, non-profit organizations have installed solar powered generators for water systems in communities in Caguas and Orocovis, and, in Utuado they retired their shopping cart pulley-system and will soon be using a newly constructed provisional bridge.
Not only will the bridge provide residents with a means of leaving, but it will allow work to begin on the wastewater plant.

The complexity of the situation mandated an unprecedented response by everyone.
The answers aren’t always as fast or as permanent as we would like, but in the words of Voltaire,

"Don’t let the perfect be the enemy of the good."


People are constantly working on the recovery process – from communities making a ladder to cross a riverbed where a bridge used to be, to voluntary agencies working together to bring generators for water systems back online, to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers building provisional bridges and clearing roads, to the federal family providing commodities, funding, and organizational structure.

It is, as it always will be, a team effort, a nation coming together.
Puerto Rico,

se levanta

.



####
document number 12: 
Kidnap victim seen bound by chains in police video


Newly released video shows New Mexico police officers stopping a van that and finding a woman bound by chains in the back of the vehicle.

Video from one of the officer's cameras shows the woman, identified as Jane Priebe, alive but shaken, with a chain around her neck tethering her to the floor.

'Oh my God, thank you,' she tells the officers, her cuffed hands clenched into fists in front of her.

PLAY


Top Articles by

Daily Mail

Trump reveals Secret Service 'SHOT suspect' after White House lockdown About Connatix V43004






Read More SPONSORED /


Coming Next Skip Ad

More than a year of planning went into the kidnapping, authorities said.
Priebe was stalked by an ex-boyfriend and his companion before they dragged her away from her apartment in Las Vegas in late January.

Scroll down for video




linkBaseURL":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4597440/Police-video-shows-rescue-kidnap-victim-bound-chains.html#v-614943390874552464","isMobile":false,"duration":144000,"src":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/video/mol/2017/06/12/614943390874552464/1024x576_MP4_614943390874552464.mp4","source":"KRQE","playerId":"default","title":"New video shows police rescue of woman in chains","preload":"none","initialVideo":true,"thumbnail":"https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/06/12/22/415F751B00000578-0-image-a-1_1497304731723.jpg","poster":"https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/pix/2017/06/12/22/415F751B00000578-0-image-a-2_1497304732731.jpg","syndicationService":null,"shortURL":"http://dailym.ai/2sgGFAC#v-614943390874552464","plugins":{"social-share":{"embedUrl":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/embed/video/1482721.html"},"autoplay-next-video":{"videos":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/1482721/related-videos.json","countdown_time":10},"ads-setup":{"videoAdServerUrl":"https://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ads?sz=[size]=%2F424397508%2Fdm.video%2Fdm_video_news==s=1=vp=xml_vast3=1=[referrer_url]=[timestamp]","adsEnabled":true,"adsCancelTimeout":15000,"screen":{"width":636,"height":358}},"sources":{"url":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/614943390874552464/video-sources.json"},"flyout":{"viewportOffset":0.4,"switchBack":true,"forceFlyout":{"active":true,"muted":true,"switchBack":false}},"tracking":{"channelShortName":"news","sponsored":null,"referenceId":1482721,"trackingType":"embedded"},"animated-preview":{"data-hd-fps":7,"displayName":null,"data-hd-frame-count":70,"frames":150,"width":636,"src":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/636x382_JPG-SINGLE_891114693591937847.jpg","fps":0,"data-film":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/308x174_JPG_891114693591937847.jpg","data-fps":7,"data-video":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/636x382_MP4_891114693591937847.mp4","data-hd-film":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2017/06/12/891114693591937847/636x382_JPG-HD_891114693591937847.jpg","data-hd-frame-width":636,"data-frame-height":172,"data-frame-width":308,"data-frame-count":70,"height":356,"data-hd-frame-height":356},"related-videos":{"videos":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/1482721/related-videos.json"}},"videoId":"614943390874552464","descr":"New Mexico State Police pulled over a van and found a woman chained down by the neck inside","referenceId":1482721,"grapeshot":{"article":{"articleURL":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4597440/Police-video-shows-rescue-kidnap-victim-bound-chains.html"}}}" src="https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/video/mol/2017/06/12/614943390874552464/640x360_MP4_614943390874552464.mp4">




####
document number 13: 
Grey Skies and Dancing




For the past five days, Sea Dragon has been moving slowly through a dense cloud of fog, with visibility limited to less than a mile or so.
We are a few hundred miles off of Newfoundland, moving over the Grand Banks in a steady northeast direction.
We are in a region famous for fishing, and more dramatically, the Titanic.
Though we joked about icebergs prior to the expedition, there was actually an iceberg warning issued for the region that states that icebergs are slowly and continuously moving out of the Labrador Sea.
We have plotted each iceberg on our navigation charts and we are constantly on the lookout for anything suspicious on the radar, while also being very aware during our watches.

We have crossed paths with several ships and fishing boats, and yesterday a small green plane flew over us during the day.
Each time it passed, based on the little information we can gather from the AIS system, we create and share stories and theories.
Was the plane a Canadian environmental agency enforcing fisheries management?
Was the plane searching for a rescue?
Captain Phil spoke with several of the captains from the nearby vessels, indicating that each is on a particular unique mission, some fishing, some carrying shipping containers.
The fishing boat that we communicated with last night was crab fishing.
We all wished they would hand off some to us for dinner.
I definitely have a new understanding of the offshore fishermen lifestyle and the elements they endure.
The cold burns my gloved hands in an hour, and I am able to shift around with my watch mates to warm up.
During the night shifts, our watch keeps the tasks pretty even, each of us steering for 30 minutes, then looking out for ships for the next 30 minutes, and then watching the radar down below to warm up.
We repeat this, give or take, through the 3 hour night shift.
I have a feeling fishermen have longer colder nights, though I am pretty certain we are all being pretty hard core out here.

Under the cloud of fog, and beneath of the wet deck is an amazing crew of passionate ocean lovers, ready for the adventure and ready to help 5 Gyres with the mission to collect plastic pollution samples in the Viking Subpolar Gyre.
The enthusiasm and generosity aboard outweighs the cold toes for sure.
This morning, Genevieve was cooking lentils and rice for lunch, while Aly, Allison, and I sat in the galley and chatted We reminisced about our high school experiences, talked about which sunscreen contained the least amount of harmful chemicals, and had a small dance party to The Cranberries.
Laughs are contagious and naturally warm us all up.


McDonald's straw plus more plastic pollution (Grape Bay).









Biking around.


Bricks everywhere.


First pubic beach in US.


Fixed gear duo.


Rest.


Michael Brown and flag.


The crew.
Paul joins.
(Cbox, Grasshopper, Paul the aussie, Stiv and Corey)


Beautiful beach.


5 Gyres tabling.


Bikes and trains.



####
document number 14: 
How I Learned What I Know About Candidate Sourcing



When it comes to my theories and best practices for leveraging information systems for quickly finding highly qualified candidates, I am often asked, "So, how did you figure all of this stuff out?"

It’s a fantastic question, and I am happy to be asked it, but my answer doesn’t seem to satisfy anyone.

The short answer is literally that "I just figured it out."

The long answer provides some insight into how I figured some of this candidate search stuff out, but I think the real value and message of my personal story is that anyone can become quite proficient at electronic talent discovery – and it’s less dependent on any training you receive and more on how you approach your job.

When people ask me how I’ve managed to "figure out" all of this candidate search stuff, it seems they want to hear that I went through some specific training program, that I read a certain book, that I worked under some sourcing guru or something similar.

The reality is I’ve never worked under any sourcing guru, I’ve never attended any sourcing training classes, and I didn’t read any books on candidate sourcing.
FAR from it.

In fact, when I started in the recruiting industry at a small, privately held staffing agency in Northern Virginia in January 1997, I received very little recruiting training, let alone any specialized training on how to find candidates.
I was shown a Lotus Notes-based C-PAS resume database and told "this is where you find candidates."

It is important to know that I did not enter the staffing industry with any prior experience or advantages that would help me in leveraging information systems to identify talent.
When I started in recruiting, I did not own a computer.
I graduated college with a B.A. in Psychology, not "even" a B.S., let alone a technical degree like Computer Science or Information Systems.
Although I was told that the company’s C-PAS database supported Boolean search, I did not know what Boolean search was.

Not only did I not know what Boolean search was – I did not know you could find resumes on the Internet.
I did not know about AltaVista, and Google did not exist yet.

In 1997, my company did not use any job boards – I did not know Monster existed (or OCC, for that matter – for those who recall where Monster got their search interface from).

My company’s main source of candidates came from people responding to newspaper classified ads who faxed their resumes in, which were subsequently scanned into the C-PAS database, and from resumes collected from job fairs which were also scanned in.
I believe that the resume database had about 70,000 records or so when I started with the company.

My Training


My "training" (picture me using air quotes for emphasis) consisted of someone showing me how to navigate C-PAS, telling me about the AND and OR Boolean operators (nothing about NOT), and being told that you could find candidates in C-PAS by entering in keywords from job descriptions.
There certainly wasn’t any "formal" training – I think this was all explained to me in about 20 minutes.

Yes, I am serious.

I was never trained on cold calling/phone sourcing – it never even occurred to me to try to call into a company to find people.
Our database was how we found candidates, and how any recruiter at any other company found their candidates, for all I knew.

How I Learned Boolean Search


Absent of any real training and lacking a mentor, I essentially learned the art and science of leveraging Boolean search strings to find candidates the hard way – through trial and error.

"Trial and error" is really common language for the scientific method– investigating, acquiring new knowledge, and correcting and integrating previous knowledge.
According to Wikipedia, "To be termed scientific, a method of inquiry must be based on gathering observable, empirical and measurable evidence subject to specific principles of reasoning.
A scientific method consists of the collection of data through observation and experimentation, and the formulation and testing of hypotheses."

Although I did not know it at the time, and I certainly wouldn’t have told anyone that I was learning my job through the scientific method, this is pretty much what I was actually doing.
If something I was trying to do didn’t work – I didn’t have anyone else to go to for answers – so I had to get creative, experiment, and keeping hacking at it until I finally found a way that worked and got me the results I needed.
This is a horribly painful and frustrating process, but I have since learned that it’s actually a very effective method of learning.

For example, if I needed a QA Test Engineer with experience testing applications developed in VB, I’d throw all of the search terms from the job description and required skills in and run with it.
Once I exhausted those results, if I didn’t have the candidates I needed, failing to cover the position I was assigned was not an option – I had to find another way.
So I’d try something else (i.e., experiment and test a hypothesis) – like wonder if every QA Test Engineer who has experience testing applications written in VB would actually mention VB in their resume…and I would then use AND NOT (VB or "Visual Basic") to target those people and start calling QA Test Engineers who didn’t mention VB in their resume and simply ask them what languages the applications they have experience testing had been developed in.

After 5 calls to people who did not mention VB in their resume, I found a woman who had in fact tested applications written in VB (and I subsequently placed her).
Thus I learned part 1 of what I now call the "Cardinal Rule of E-Sourcing," which states that for every search term you are thinking of using in your Boolean string, first ask yourself if everyone with that skill, experience, or title would mention it in their resume.
Because I discovered that many don’t.

I learned part 2 of the Cardinal Rule of E-Sourcing(which states that for every search term you are thinking of using in your Boolean string, consider every possible way that it can be mentioned) through simple observation.
As I reviewed my search results, I would notice terms in resumes that I did not specifically search for that seemed to mean the same thing as my search terms.
I would make note of these alternate terms and incorporate them back into my search, continuously refining and improving the searches.

My Performance


Although I am pretty good at what I do now, my career in recruiting didn’t start with any indication that I would be any better than average at finding and placing candidates.
In fact, the owner of the company told me later that he was almost sure I would fail.

I started in recruiting on January 13th, 1997, and I did not make my first placement until March – it was a financial analyst at AOL (everyone remembers their first hire, right?).

However, from April to December 1997, I placed 71 more candidates, which is an average of just about 8 hires per month, leading me to be recognized as the Recruiter of the Year, outperforming more experienced and tenured recruiters by a wide margin (the next closest recruiter had 30 fewer placements for the year).
And this was accomplished in an environment without any candidate "ownership," for those who are familiar with the agency vernacular.

I can tell you precisely how I achieved those numbers.
While I had pretty good candidate relationship development skills, good candidate closing and control, good voicemail techniques, and good matching skills (as good as any recruiter with 3-12 months of experience), I had developed the ability to use Boolean searches to quickly find large quantities of precisely matched and highly qualified candidates in direct response to client/manager needs – faster and better than most.
And, I planned every single day, without fail.

Interestingly, to this day, I find that most sourcers and recruiters do not come in each day with a call plan.
Having a daily call plan to execute first thing in the A.M. that I developed the previous afternoon from my searches was definitely one of the keys to my productivity and my success.
I eventually got to the point that if I searched for and built a call list of 20 potential candidates for a given position, I would have 2 A+ candidates submitted on the position within 24-48 hours, and typically have 1-2 backups.

For those who are interested, in my first year as an agency recruiter, I averaged over 3 external candidate submittals (candidates presented to client hiring managers) per day – my record was 14 in a single day.
Most months I would have 65-70 external submittals and over 20 interviews (some call them send outs).
As most recruiting managers/directors can attest to – it’s difficult to NOT get 6-10 hires per month from those numbers.

Based on my early performance, I was promoted to recruiting manager and then later to director of recruiting, where I focused most of my time on training and developing my recruiting staff.
Interestingly, after the privately held company I worked for was acquired by a large publicly traded staffing firm, I took a position as a "market manager" of recruiting where I was responsible for personal production as a recruiter as well as for managing a team of recruiters.
After 7 years of not "working a desk," I was able to quickly ramp up and achieve "Platinum Performer" status (top 5% firm-wide) in less than 12 months.

When I hit the phones in 2005, I did not have a network of people/candidates – I started quite literally from scratch.
I was able to quickly achieve high levels of performance based primarily on two things: #1 My ability to quickly find the right people, and #2 My daily planning.
It doesn’t get any simpler than that.

Lessons Learned


I think it’s been a huge benefit to be self taught.
By no means is the way I came to know what I know about candidate sourcing ideal, nor is it practical or scalable.
However, by having to figure everything out on my own I had no preconceived notions about sourcing, recruiting, the "right way" to do anything, or what was possible/not possible.
There was no proverbial "box."

For example:


Candidate Pipelines: I’ve literally

never

had to focus on pipelining candidates, because I’ve always been able to pretty much find whatever I needed within 24-48 hours.
Many years into my career, I would read articles about the importance of developing talent pipelines, and my response was incredulity.
I honestly could not figure out why anyone would have to identify candidates prior to having a confirmed need.
It seemed like such a waste of time and effort based on my personal experience – what happens if the needs never come?
What happens if the positions do finally come, but all of your pipelined candidates don’t match the requirements (they’re rarely exactly as forecasted), or are they are no longer available or entertaining making a change?
Later I would learn that my instincts were surprisingly accurate, at least according to the Toyota Way/Lean philosophy.
Why bother building inventories of candidates based on forecasts when you can achieve Just-In-Time recruiting?


Active/Passive Candidates: I was never told that some candidates were "active" and that others were "passive," nor was I brainwashed into thinking that "passive" candidates were always better than "active" candidates.
If anything, I learned that everyone is a candidate.
I never thought twice about calling a resume that was 1, 2, 3, or 4+ years old – in fact, some of my easiest, most frictionless placements came from people whose resume had not been updated in 4 years.
It’s a funny thing – if you find the right people and present them with the right opportunity – you can turn a non-job seeker into one.
Imagine that.
:-)


Phone Sourcing: I’ve never had to make a truly "cold" call because I’ve always been able to quickly find the candidates I need, or find the people who know the candidates I need…and to be honest, after I learned that some people rely heavily on cold-call phone sourcing to identify candidates – it never really made sense to me, because it has many intrinsic limitations when compared to searching information systems, including low control over critical candidate variables, and a low ROI.



There is No Sourcing Gene


It always bothers me when people say I have a "talent" for candidate sourcing – that all too easily "explains away" everything I have worked so very hard to figure out.

There is no gene for sourcing and recruiting.
Besides, Talent is Overrated – deliberate practice is where it’s at.
I literally come into work every day to get better at what I do.
Most people don’t – they just come into work and do what they’ve always done.
It seems like such a subtle difference, but I can assure you, it’s not.

I honestly don’t think there is anything unique about me – I am simply a product of my environment.
If I had not started in the recruiting industry in a sink-or-swim environment, or if I had more in depth training (and learned the "right" way to source/recruit) or if I had been taught that the only way to find high quality candidates was through phone sourcing and cold calling, I know for a fact that I would not have the skills or ability I have today, and you would not be reading this blog!
Looking back, I am thankful for my lack of training and for the unique opportunity that I was given – it played a big part in making me who I am today.

While there is definitely no sourcing/recruiting gene – I do have to give some credit to my personality traits (there’s that B.A. in Psychology rearing its head again).
I’m a bit of a perfectionist, I am very competitive (I hate to lose at anything), I don’t enjoy doing things unless I do them well, I really enjoy figuring things out/solving problems, and I don’t give up – I will find a way.

If I were to self-diagnose, I’d say I have an obsessive personality.
The more "PC" way to describe an obsessive personality includes "focused," "driven," "goal oriented," "never gives up," "has to be the best," etc.
I have a theory that most top performers in business or sports (or anything, for that matter) have obsessive personalities.
But that’s another post entirely.

The moral of this story is that you don’t need any special training or any particular background to become exceptional at sourcing candidates or any step in the recruiting life cycle – in fact, I’d argue that all you really need is the desire to become very good at it, and the focus and drive to put in the deliberate practice necessary to achieve your goal.
If you’re truly committed and dedicated to mastering a thing, you will, or you’ll come close trying.



####
document number 15: 
Yahoo built spying software after US govt request


The technology company Yahoo has secretly built a software program to search all of its customers' incoming emails, at the request of United States spy agencies.

The company complied with a classified US government directive, scanning hundreds of millions of Yahoo Mail accounts at the behest of the National Security Agency or FBI, said two former employees and a third person apprised of the events.

Former government officials and private surveillance experts say they have never seen such a broad directive for real-time web collection.
Photo: 123RF


Some surveillance experts said this represents the first case to surface of a US internet company agreeing to a spy agency's demand by searching all arriving messages, as opposed to examining stored messages or scanning a small number of accounts in real time.

It is not known what information intelligence officials were looking for, only that they wanted Yahoo to search for a set of characters.

That could mean a phrase in an email or an attachment, said the sources, who did not want to be identified.

Reuters was unable to determine what data Yahoo may have handed over, if any, and if intelligence officials had approached other email providers besides Yahoo with this kind of request.

According to the two former employees, Yahoo Chief Executive Marissa Mayer's decision to obey the directive roiled some senior executives and led to the June 2015 departure of Chief Information Security Officer Alex Stamos, who now holds the top security job at Facebook.

"Yahoo is a law abiding company, and complies with the laws of the United States," the company said in a brief statement in response to Reuters.

Yahoo declined any further comment.

Through a Facebook spokesman, Alex Stamos declined a request for an interview.

The NSA referred questions to the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, which declined to comment.

The demand to search Yahoo Mail accounts came in the form of a classified directive sent to the company's legal team, according to the three people familiar with the matter.

US phone and internet companies are known to have handed over bulk customer data to intelligence agencies.

But some former government officials and private surveillance experts said they had not previously seen either such a broad directive for real-time web collection or one that required the creation of a new computer program.

"I've never seen that, a wiretap in real time on a 'selector,'" said Albert Gidari, a lawyer who represented phone and internet companies on surveillance issues for 20 years before moving to Stanford University this year.

A selector refers to a type of search term used to zero in on specific information.

"It would be really difficult for a provider to do that," Mr Gidari said.

Reuters was unable to confirm whether the 2015 demand went to other companies, or if any complied.

Google and Microsoft, two major US email service providers, did not respond to requests for comment.

Under laws including the 2008 amendments to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, intelligence agencies can ask US phone and internet companies to provide customer data to aid foreign intelligence-gathering efforts for a variety of reasons, including prevention of terrorist attacks.

Disclosures by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden and others have exposed the extent of electronic surveillance and led US authorities to modestly scale back some of the programs, in part to protect privacy rights.

Companies including Yahoo have challenged some classified surveillance before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, a secret tribunal.

As tech companies become better at encrypting data, they are likely to face more such requests from spy agencies.

-

Reuters


Copyright © 2016, Radio New Zealand



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = bomb threat response
document number 1: 
Extortion Scheme Leads To Kalispell Bomb Threat


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


A fake bomb threat at the Kalispell Walmart Wednesday was initially labeled by law enforcement as swatting incident, where pranksters hijack phone numbers in order to report fake threats to police.
But the bomb threat was actually part of a scam to extort money out of a Montana correctional officer.

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Montana Public Radio, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 2: 
Siblings charged in sexual orientation extortion plot


Hide caption Whitney Hurt, Jvell Hurt


By Stephanie Taylor / Staff Writer

Police believe a brother and sister from Tuscaloosa blackmailed at least a dozen victims, threatening to reveal their sexual orientations to family and co-workers and even calling in bomb threats to the victims’ jobs and a church.

Jvell Hurt and Whitney Hurt are both facing charges of extortion and making terrorist threats.
Investigators believe both are responsible for a bomb threat called in to the University of Alabama School of Nursing on Oct.
9 and that Jvell Hurt called in a threat to First United Methodist Church during a Sunday morning service on Sept.
29.

Tuscaloosa Police Lt.
Darren Beams said the investigation is ongoing.
The commander of the West Alabama Human Trafficking Task Force said investigators believe the crimes could go back several years, and urge any other victims to come forward.

According to court records, a victim told police that Jvell Hurt, 25, told him to bring $2,100 to his home on Dragons Lane or he would "end him."
Records show he also threatened to distribute private photos of the man.
Hurt is also accused of calling that man’s friends and family members, demanding they pressure the victim to pay.

The victim told officers he dropped the money in a green basket at the address.

"During this investigation, we were able to identify the defendant as a suspect by digital evidence," an officer wrote.
"The defendant has continued to contact the victim and multiple associates of the victim in an attempt to obtain more cash."

Jvell Hurt was taken into custody after another victim conducted a money drop at the house.

Jvell Hurt is also accused of calling in a threat to First United Methodist Church during an 11 a.m. service, alarming members of the congregation and staff.
The victim is a member of the church.

Then on Oct.
9, a similar threat was called into UA’s nursing school, where one of the men is employed.

Jvell Hurt "continually threatened the victim with texts and emails," a police investigator wrote in that case report.
"Money was exchanged after threats of physical harm."

Jvell Hurt also contacted that victim’s supervisor, the supervisor’s husband and co-workers, according to police.

Jvell Hurt is accused of two counts of extortion against two victims and two counts of making terrorist threats — against the church and school.

Whitney Hurt, 23, is accused of making a terrorist threat against the nursing school and of extorting one of the two victims.

Beams said the task force is working cases involving at least 10 more victims.
Anyone who may have had contact with Jvell Hurt in the past is asked to contact them at 205-248-4750.

Both face marijuana possession charges after police searched the house on Dragons Lane, where they both reside.


Hello reader, our article commenting that you would normally see here is temporarily shut down.
We still want to hear from you, so we invite you to go to our Facebook page or submit a letter to the editor.



####
document number 3: 
Homemade, Cheap and Dangerous


Terror Cells Favor Simple Ingredients In Building Bombs

By Craig Whitlock Washington Post Foreign Service

LONDON, July 4 -- The 39-page memo recovered from an al-Qaeda laptop computer in Pakistan three years ago read like an Idiot's Guide to Bombmaking.
Forget military explosives or fancy detonators, it lectured.
Instead, the manual advised a shopping trip to a hardware store or pharmacy, where all the necessary ingredients for a terrorist attack are stocked on the shelves.

"Make use of that which is available at your disposal and . .
.
bend it to suit your needs, (improvise) rather than waste valuable time becoming despondent over that which is not within your reach," counseled the author of the memo, Dhiren Barot, a British citizen who said he developed his keep-it-simple philosophy by "observing senior planners" at al-Qaeda training camps.

Barot, who was later captured near London and is serving a 30-year sentence, had envisioned an attack with multiple car bombs that would detonate liquid-gas cylinders encased in rusty nails -- a strategy with striking similarities to an attempt last week by a suspected terrorist cell to blow up three vehicles in London and Glasgow, Scotland.

Counterterrorism officials have warned for years that Osama bin Laden and his lieutenants have tried to obtain weapons of mass destruction, such as a nuclear device or chemical or biological weapons.
In response, U.S. military and intelligence agencies have invested vast amounts of money to block their acquisition.

So far, however, al-Qaeda and its affiliates have relied almost solely on simple, homemade bombs crafted from everyday ingredients -- such as nail-polish remover and fertilizer -- when plotting attacks in Europe and the United States.

The makeshift bombs lack the destructive potential of the conventional explosives that rake Iraq on a daily basis.
They are also less reliable, as demonstrated by the car bombs that failed to go off in London last week after the culprits tried to ignite them with detonators wired to cellphones.

But other attempts have generated plenty of mayhem and damage, including the kitchen-built backpack bombs that killed 52 people in the London public transit system on July 7, 2005.

"It makes no difference to your average person if somebody puts a car bomb out there that is crude or one that is sophisticated," said Chris Driver-Williams, a retired British major and military intelligence officer who studies explosive devices used by terrorist groups.
"If it detonates, all of a sudden you've got a very serious device and one that has achieved exactly what the terrorists wanted."

The advantages of homemade explosives are that they are easy and cheap to manufacture, as well as difficult for law enforcement agencies to detect.
According to one expert, the peroxide-based liquid explosives that an al-Qaeda cell allegedly intended to use to blow up nine transatlantic airliners last summer would have cost as little as $15 a bomb.

It is technically simple to make such explosives.
Instructions are widely available on the Internet.
Experts added, however, that it takes skill and sophistication to construct a viable bomb by adding timing devices, detonators or secondary charges.

Investigations have found evidence that most al-Qaeda cells involved in bombing plots in Europe have received training in camps in Pakistan or Afghanistan, or were tutored by graduates of those camps.

Among them: cell members involved in the July 7, 2005, bombings in Britain and a separate plot two weeks later that also targeted the London subway.
The suspected ringleaders of the May 16, 2003, bombings in Casablanca were also al-Qaeda camp veterans who had experimented in explosives.
Richard Reid, who tried to blow up an American Airlines flight from Paris to Miami in 2001, was taught how to build his shoe bomb in Afghanistan.

Stephen Swain, former head of the international counterterrorism unit at Scotland Yard in London, said the culprits in each case had been trained by seasoned al-Qaeda operatives "without a shadow of a doubt."

"It's a common thread throughout the entire theater of al-Qaeda-style operations," said Swain, who retired last year and is a senior consultant for Control Risks Group, an international security firm.
"There's quite a lot of training going on in this regard."

Simple Recipes

Terrorist groups have been using homemade explosives for years.
In February 1993, Islamic radicals drove a truck loaded with about 1,500 pounds of urea nitrate -- a fertilizer-based explosive -- and hydrogen-gas cylinders into a garage underneath the World Trade Center.

The bomb killed six people and injured more than 1,000.
Investigators determined that the cell built the bomb in New Jersey by consulting manuals brought from Pakistan.
Two years later, the ringleader of the plot, Ramzi Yousef, tried but failed to use homemade liquid explosives to down 11 airliners crossing the Pacific Ocean.

The same year, Timothy J.
McVeigh blew up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City with a truck bomb consisting of 5,000 pounds of fuel oil and fertilizer, killing 168 people.

Since then, it has become more difficult to purchase large quantities of fertilizer without attracting attention; sellers in the United States and many European countries are supposed to notify authorities of suspicious customers.

The last known attempt by al-Qaeda to construct a fertilizer-based bomb in Europe came in 2003, when a cell operative bought 1,200 pounds of bagged Kemira GrowHow fertilizer for about $200 from an agricultural supply store in Britain.
The salesman, John Stone, later testified that he thought the transaction was strange because it was the wrong time of year to apply the substance and the buyer claimed to have only a small garden plot.

"I hope you're not going around bombing anything," Stone said he told the buyer half-jokingly, although the salesclerk did not notify police.

British authorities were tipped off soon after, however, by an employee at a rental-storage center where the cell was keeping the fertilizer.
In April, five members of the group were convicted in the plot, known as Operation Crevice.
Many European fertilizer manufacturers have since reduced the amount of ammonium nitrate, a key bomb ingredient, in their products.

Partly as a result, European and U.S. counterterrorism officials said terrorist cells are increasingly turning to peroxide-based explosives, which can be made in much smaller quantities from materials available at drugstores.

The most commonly used compound is triacetone triperoxide, or TATP.
Primary ingredients for a homemade batch typically include acetone, which can be found in nail-polish remover, and hydrogen peroxide, a chemical used in hair-bleaching products.

TATP wields about 85 percent of the explosive power of TNT and can be made in a kitchen or bathroom.
A dime-size amount of the explosive can ignite a fireball the size of a basketball.

'Nobody Ever Stops Me'

The risky side of TATP is that it is highly unstable.
A spark or light friction can detonate the explosive, making it extraordinarily difficult to handle.
Experts and police said there have been numerous cases in which suspected terrorists -- as well as foolhardy amateur chemists -- have set off accidental explosions, resulting in death or severe injuries.

"You need to concentrate the chemicals," said Hans J. Michels, a professor of chemical engineering at Imperial College in London.
"It's a filthy job and it's dangerous, but it can be done."

Despite the dangers, al-Qaeda cells have used peroxide-based explosives in more than a dozen plots in the past decade, including the July 7 and 21, 2005, London incidents, as well as attacks in Casablanca, Istanbul and the Indonesian island of Bali, according to counterterrorism officials.
Danish police also discovered TATP in September during the arrest of seven terrorism suspects in Odense.

In crystalline form, TATP looks like powdered sugar and is difficult to detect in airports; security officials need to examine an exposed surface with a swab kit or other tester to determine its presence.

"TATP and peroxide-based explosives are concern number one for the aviation industry," said Ehud Keinan, a chemistry professor at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology and a leading researcher on the substance.
"It will take some time before we are protected.
Right now, we are not."

Reached by telephone in Paris, where he was scheduled to give a lecture about TATP on Wednesday at an international conference, Keinan said he often carries a small sample of the volatile compound in his carry-on luggage when he flies -- just to test airport security.
"Nobody ever stops me," he said.

When asked if it might be dangerous to sit next to him on a plane, he said, "If you know how to take care of it, it's okay.
If you don't know what you're doing, you're in trouble."

U.S. Homeland Security officials have said terrorism suspects arrested last August in Britain on charges that they were plotting to blow up several transatlantic airliners might have been planning to smuggle on board TATP or a related compound, HMTD, hexamethylene triperoxide diamine.
Experts said it would take as little as one or two quarts of those explosives to down a large plane.

TATP was discovered in the late 19th century but was deemed to have no industrial or commercial applications because it was so unstable.
Researchers generally ignored the substance until 1980, when Palestinian fighters used it for the first time in a bomb in Israel.

Palestinian bombers have used it ever since.
TATP was used for the first time in an attack in Europe in July 1994, when Palestinians exploded a car bomb outside the Israeli Embassy in London.

U.S. and European counterterrorism investigators paid limited attention to the explosive until the July 2005 bombings in London.
Afterward, the New York City Police Department built an exact replica of the apartment in Leeds, England, that the July 7 conspirators allegedly used to manufacture their backpack bombs.

Hugh O'Rourke, deputy inspector of the NYPD counterterrorism division, said the police department wanted to show beat officers what a kitchen-counter TATP production line would look like.
He said it is easy to mistake the white powder and its cooking tools -- such as pool cleaners, large tubs or commercial-size fans -- for a common drug lab.

"Patrol cops see a lot of white powder, think it's crack, and want to touch it and package it," which could easily result in an explosion, he said.
"We don't want them doing that."



####
document number 4: 
Military analysis of the American cruise missile attack on Syria



US fires Tomahawk cruise missiles into Syria in retaliation ... - hindustantimes.com


The military aspects of the attack can be termed a limited success.
It is now confirmed that only 23 cruise missiles hit the target.
One reason for this could be that only certain areas were targeted where there were no Russians.
Syria itself is a puny power, and the attack met with no resistance.
But in future, the Russians could give anti-ship missiles to Syria to bolster their defense.
In such a scenario a couple of anti-ship missiles fired and hitting the US destroyers could lead to over 1500 deaths.
This would set the stage for a confrontation with Russia.
An escalation would then be a certainty.

The threat by the US to launch more missile attacks show that Trump has for the moment, shelved the battle against the ISIS.
This was expected as the President is an impetuous man with little experience.

Surrender to Hawks


There are many hawks led by Senator McCain and his ilk who have hailed the airstrike on the Syrian airfield.
They have asked for more attacks, and now the US says that no peace is possible in Syria without the removal of Assad.
With the Russians and Iranians backing Assad, the stage is set for a confrontation.
War is an extension of the political aim.
Keeping this in mind, the attack by Trump is, in reality, an attack on Russia.
Despite all talk, it is clear that the target is Russia and its support for Assad.

The attack


The attack itself did a lot of damage.

But to completely degrade the airfield for operations, more attacks will be needed.
The Syrian aircraft took off again in just a few hours after the assault to bomb the ISIS targets.
In case the US were to follow up with further attacks, the chance of an escalation are bright.
There will be a reaction as per Newton's laws of motion.

Every action has a reaction.
The US forces in Syria will now be at greater risk.
The attack without waiting for an independent confirmation as to who uses the gas weapons is reminiscent of the build-up to the invasion of Iraq and Vietnam.
Similarly, at that time the US Presidents upped the ante leading to thousands of American young men being killed.

The objectives were not achieved.

The attack has opened a Pandora's box, and Trump cannot back off, as it would be a loss of face.
He has to shift the focus away from fighting the ISIS to Assad and Russia.
In such a scenario if the US destroyers are hit a nuclear conflagration cannot be ruled out.
Obama now appears a much saner president than Trump who is chasing glory as a "great president."
He may well end up as the man who started the nuclear war.



####
document number 5: 
The petrol bomb’s incendiary – and uncertain – history


Incendiaries of varying complexity have been used in warfare since ancient times.


The petrol bomb – or "Molotov cocktail" – is an iconic symbol of 20th-century political violence.
Simple, cheap and effective, it has become a staple feature of protest, riot and rebellion; a weapon of choice for the discontented masses.
But what are its origins, and who can be credited with its invention?

This is a question with no simple answer.
Incendiaries of varying complexity have been used in warfare since ancient times.
Indeed, the use of fire as weapon is referenced among the earliest books of the Bible.
It should come as no surprise then, that the petrol bomb has many ancestors, with various earthenware incendiary projectiles recorded in use as early as the 9th century BC.

Looking to more recent times, it is clear that the petrol bomb also has more immediate forerunners in the 19th century.
At the very least, the basic concept was prefigured in the spectre of the Pétroleuses, an imaginary body of working-class women accused of starting the fires that devastated Paris in the final days of the commune in 1871.

Descriptions of these phantom arsonists typically spoke of bottles of petrol and burning rags being thrown through cellar windows.
For the most part, the fires had actually been started by the soldiers of the commune, using more traditional methods of arson.

Jes


Nevertheless, the petrol bomb as we know it today – a glass bottle or jar, filled with a simple incendiary mixture, and fixed with a basic fuse or wick to facilitate ignition upon breakage – is commonly believed to have originated during the Spanish Civil War (1936–39), where it was used by both nationalists and republicans as an anti-tank weapon.

Those early examples were crude and remarkably unstable.
As one English veteran of the International Brigade later commented: "At least 10% of those who try these nasty things are likely to burn themselves quite badly."

A more refined, mass-produced, version was subsequently developed by the Finnish Army for use against soviet tanks during the Winter War (1939–40).
Here, it attracted more widespread attention, and earned an almost mythical status in the narrative of Finland’s surprise victory over the Red Army.

This was also the conflict in which it gained the nickname "Molotov cocktail", a mocking reference to the then soviet foreign minister, Vyacheslav Molotov.

C-Monster


Thereafter, the concept quickly spread.
In 1940, the British started work on a version with a self-igniting mixture for use by the home guard.
In the 1950s, it was again employed against the Red Army by anti-communist resistance groups, most notably during the Hungarian Revolution (1956).
Since then, its frequent replication has seen it pass into the realm of common knowledge.

Yet this is not so much an origin story as a narrative of how the petrol bomb has become embedded in popular consciousness.
Indeed, it is clear that the device – in all its fundamental aspects – was in use much earlier than the Spanish Civil War.

A case in point is the Irish revolution (1916–23), where it may have been in use as early as May 1920.
That month, members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) used bottles of petrol and paraffin to set fire to a police barracks in Limerick.
But although some of those involved in the attack later likened their actions to the use of Molotov cocktails, this is somewhat misleading.

Leckey Road, Derry, Northern Ireland by Femke Soontiens.


There is little to suggest that these projectiles carried a fuse or wick.
Rather, they were used to spread accelerant across the roof.
This became a common tactic thereafter.

By 1922, there is irrefutable evidence of the use of petrol bombs by the IRA; this time along the newly created Irish border.
Contemporary documents reveal that local units – under the leadership of future Irish politician and international statesman Frank Aiken – had evolved their own form of the now familiar device, and were using it regularly in operations ranging from sectarian attacks on civilian homes to ambushes against the police and military.

It was especially valued for its ability to "make an oven of an armoured car" while avoiding the sort of civilian casualties that could result from the use of conventional explosives.

The novelty of the concept is clear from a painstaking third-party description of the device submitted to Aiken’s superior officers in September 1922:

It consists of a bottle containing a mixture – ½ petrol, ½ paraffin, surrounded by a rubber band which holds in place a piece of fuse (4 sec) at either end of which is a safety match head.
One end of the fuse is lighted and by the time the bottle strikes the objective the other end ignites causing the mixture to go on fire.


Riot police dodge petrol bombs thrown by protesters outside the Greek Parliament during a demonstration in central Athens, Greece, March 2010.


Although improvised incendiaries were nothing new to the IRA, their past efforts had tended to be more sophisticated, employing complex chemical mixtures and intricate hand-grenade constructions.

Whereas the contrasting simplicity of Aiken’s petrol bomb should have made it an asset, in reality it only served to marginalise it.
His superiors simply did not understand the device:

I doubt that it will have such an effect on an armoured car.
What is to prevent the bottle breaking before the mixture takes fire?


Consequently, there were no attempts to encourage its use beyond Aiken’s unit, and it quickly fell from memory when the conflict ended in 1923.

This surely is only one of many largely forgotten episodes in the history of the petrol bomb.
And therein lies the difficulty of the question posed at the outset of this article.

Something so simple has undoubtedly been "invented" many times over.

Over the coming months, we’ll be running pieces looking at the history and nature of violence.



####
document number 6: 
Michigan Man Sentenced for Possessing Molotov Cocktails


A 24-year-old Michigan man was sentenced today in federal court for possessing Molotov cocktails.

On March 10 in Minneapolis, United States District Court Judge John Tunheim sentenced Matthew Bradley Depalma to 42 months in prison and three years of supervised release on one count of possession of destructive devices.
Depalma was charged on Aug.
30, 2008, and pleaded guilty on Oct.
21.

According to Depalma’s plea agreement, from Aug.
22 through Aug.
29, he knowingly and intentionally possessed five Molotov cocktails that were not registered to him in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer Record.

According to a Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavit, Depalma became known to the FBI in July 2008, when Depalma attended the CrimeThinc Convergence near Waldo, Wisc.

During that event, Depalma stated his intention to travel to Minnesota to attend the RNC.

He also expressed his desire to "make some bombs" and "blow up" things during the RNC.

The affidavit states that Depalma discussed with a FBI source his desire to make Molotov cocktails, describing in detail the use of ingredients that would make the flammable liquid more viscous so that it would stick to a target and burn longer and hotter than an ordinary gasolinebased Molotov cocktail.

The affidavit states that Depalma went to a Hennepin County Library on Aug.
18 and spent 90 minutes researching recipes for explosive devices.
Depalma produced a handwritten list of items he would need to construct "special" Molotov cocktails that would stick to people and other targets.

Depalma’s conversations, recorded on Aug.
20, described a plan to place a bomb near the Xcel Center during the RNC in an effort to disrupt the convention.
The plan involved entering utility tunnels near the center and using either Molotov cocktails or a chemical bomb to destroy electrical cables and cause a power outage.
Depalma, the affidavit states, also described a related plan to use napalm-filled Molotov cocktails on the streets against police officers.
Specifically, he said, "I will light one of those pigs on fire."

The affidavit states that Depalma obtained supplies for making Molotov cocktails on Aug.
21-22.

On Aug.
22, Depalma manufactured two jugs of a homemade napalm-like substance for use in Molotov cocktails.
He created a flammable gelatin and described to another the proper technique for throwing a Molotov cocktail to obtain the best explosion.
Depalma continued to discuss his desire to make a bomb for use at the Xcel Center on either the convention’s first day (Sept.
1) or last day (Sept.
4).

According to the affidavit, Depalma stated that if he could bomb the center on Sept.
1, they might call off the convention.
He added that a "power outage would say a lot," and that it was his "main purpose."
Depalma also said he would like to bomb the Xcel Energy Center on Sept.
4, so the convention would "end with a bang."

Depalma was observed traveling to a remote location in Rosemount for the purpose of assembling and testing Molotov cocktails.
On Aug.
25, Depalma went to a remote location in Roseville for the purpose of experimenting with chemicals for a chemical bomb.

The affidavit states that Depalma manufactured three additional Molotov cocktails in a Minneapolis apartment on Aug.
28, where he was arrested.
The affidavit also states that Depalma possessed a total of five Molotov cocktails between Aug.
22-28, which were not registered to him in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer Record, as required by law.

This case was the result of an investigation by the FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force, which includes the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
It was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney W. Anders Folk.



####
document number 7: 
North Carolina airport bomb-maker admits guilt


A Tennessee man whose criminal acts seem to fit an antigovernment, survivalist profile has pleaded guilty to illegally possessing explosive material found in plastic bags found last October at the Asheville, North Carolina, airport.

Michael Christian Estes faces a maximum of five years in prison on the charge of unlawful possession of explosive material.
A sentencing date was not set when he pleaded guilty to the charge last Friday in U.S. District Court in Asheville.

Estes, formerly of Tazewell, Tennessee, was arrested a day after an improvised explosive device was discovered on October 6 near the baggage area at the Asheville Regional Airport.

Surveillance video, a tip from an airport employee who had seen a man dressed in black clothing emerge from a wooded area and the subsequent release of the suspect’s photo led to Estes’ apprehension, court documents say.

Wearing camouflage clothing, the 46-year-old suspect immediately confessed to making the device.

The explosive device didn’t explode and was rendered safe by bomb technicians.
It was constructed from retail store components, including nails, Sterno, an alarm clock, shotgun shells and ammonium nitrate droplets apparently removed from cold compress packets, the documents say.

The bomb-maker’s motivation or affiliations, if any, aren’t detailed in public records, but court documents say the crudely made bomb included the words, "For God Country" and "For all the V/N vets out there!!!"
— an apparent reference to Vietnam War veterans.

Estes told FBI agents he wanted to "fight a war on U.S. soil," but didn’t say why he targeted a government-owned regional airport.
Court documents say the would-be bomber removed the alarm’s clock’s bell, but didn’t set alarm to activate the device, the court documents say.

Authorities retrieved store video surveillance video showing Estes purchasing the bomb-making supplies at a Walmart and Lowe’s stores not far from the wooded area.

A black back pack, containing some of the same supplies, was found in the woods near the airport area which Estes described to authorities as his "staging area" where he had spent time before placing the crudely made device at the airport.
Estes had been released from prison 20 days earlier and apparently was homeless.

The Asheville

Citizen Times

reported that Estes had been released from jail only 20 days before the bomb was placed at the airport and is estranged from his family.

The newspaper also reported that Estes had been arrested in July 2015 by the Cherokee Indian Police Department after he assaulted a man with a large knife and hatchet.
It wasn’t disclosed if that assault was racially motivated.

While the Asheville newspaper has thoroughly covered the arrest and prosecution of Estes, there has been only brief mention of the airport bomb case in national media.

That led Shaun King, a writer for

The Intercept

, to opine, "The story didn’t go viral and Trump didn’t tweet about it because the bomb was not placed by an immigrant, or a Muslim, or a Mexican.
It was placed there by a good ol’ white man, Michael Christopher Estes."



####
document number 8: 
Antelope Creek Obsidian


Kaitlyn Cometa, University of Delaware

(July 12, 2016)—What is the first thing you think of when you hear someone refer to the obsidian at a specific source as "bomb" obsidian?
Probably that you don’t want to be near it when it blows up.
I however, was drawn to the idea of the "bomb" obsidian and my head flooded with questions about it.
Where does it come from?
Why does it explode when you try to drive a flake from the core?

Allen Denoyer, our experimental archaeologist and expert flintknapper, introduced me to this bad obsidian the very first time I flintknapped.
He said something along the lines of "this is probably that bomb stuff, here watch it explode" much too casually.
He proceeded to tell us that this poor quality obsidian comes from one source off of Mule Creek called Antelope Creek, and for many years everyone believed that all of the obsidian in that area was this bad "bomb" obsidian.

Recently, however, Steven Shackley discovered that there are good-quality obsidian nodules at Antelope Creek—unfortunately, the good and the bad are all mixed together.
The strange thing about the obsidian at this source is that chemically it is all the same, meaning that is came from one single volcanic event.
Yet something, potentially more water within the nodules, is causing the bad obsidian to deteriorate faster, resulting in little silica bombs.





Obsidian nodules on the ground near the Antelope Creek source area.



A bag of obsidian nodules ready for testing.





This is where my interest was piqued.
How might you tell the difference?
Do you just have to take a chance and hope shards of razor sharp obsidian don’t go flying in all directions?

My interest in this mysterious obsidian found at Antelope Creek led me to perform an experiment for my Archaeology Fair project.
With help from Allen Denoyer and Stacy Ryan, I planned my experiment, which began with retrieving the obsidian.
During the second day of experimental archaeology excursions with Allen, we trekked up to Antelope Creek, where I collected 148 nodules of obsidian.
From the beginning, I had an inkling about which was the poor-quality obsidian and which was the good based on the appearance of the cortex, or skin.

Upon returning home to our quirky camp in Cliff, I went to work.
I chose 15 nodules of the two types of obsidian I was seeing.
One type had a brown, matte cortex while the other had a shinier black cortex.
I weighed and measured all 30 nodules that I chose and placed them into individual bags.

Next came two lovely evenings of flintknapping with Allen and Stacy.
I began with what I believed to be the good obsidian, the nodules with the brown matte skin.
Much to my excitement, the first evening of flintknapping Group A obsidian was a success.
I was able to drive useable flakes from each nodule in rather good time.
This meant I was half-right so far: I could tell which nodules were effective cores.

The only thing left was to test the bad obsidian, Group B, to see how bad it really was.
This is where the title of "bomb" obsidian made me nervous.
My second evening consisted of cracking open stubborn and unpredictable obsidian nodules.
This process took nearly twice as long as the evening before, resulting in a swollen knot on my thigh and a whole lot of frustration.
The little bombs lived up to their name; after around 10 to 15 minutes of whacking potential platforms, little tiny flakes were flying.
Several were nearly impossible to crack open, resulting in miniscule unusable flakes.
Some were bad enough that I needed help from Allen to break them open.
He had no better luck and also ended up with a lap-full of tiny shards.
Out of my sample of 15, only 4 nodules produced any useable flakes, and even then they were hardly usable.

After escaping my experiment relatively unscathed, I realized I had proven my hypothesis correct!
There is in fact a visible difference between the good-quality obsidian and poor-quality obsidian found in the Antelope Creek area.
The majority of the black shiny nodules (Group B) did not produce quality flakes.
I did notice during my experiment that not all Group A obsidian was excellent quality.
The smaller, rounder nodules are still difficult to drive good-quality, usable flakes from, and would only be good for small points.
The larger nodules of the Group A obsidian do produce large, good-quality flakes for tool making.
When looking for obsidian in the Antelope Creek area, the best-quality obsidian is the larger nodules with good striking platforms and a matte brown cortex; avoid the shiny black nodules.

My experiment was a success, and I was proud to present my findings to the many people who attended our Archaeology Fair.
Although I know that lithic (stone tool and manufacturing debris) analysis doesn’t quite get the crowds a’roaring, I really enjoyed putting this experiment together and following through to get quality results and data.
It also really solidified my love for lithics!

Katie at the Archaeology Fair.




####
document number 9: 
DOJ To Help Local Authorities In Policing Riots Around The Country


The Justice Department is now assisting local authorities across the country in response to the civil unrest that has erupted in connection with the death of George Floyd in the police custody.

ARI SHAPIRO, HOST:

The Justice Department is stepping up its response to the violence spreading across the country in response to George Floyd's death.
And NPR justice correspondent Ryan Lucas joins us now.

Hi, Ryan.

RYAN LUCAS, BYLINE: Hi there.

SHAPIRO: This is the most sustained and widespread social unrest we have seen in the U.S. for a long time.
What's the Justice Department doing in response?

LUCAS: Well, the protests demanding justice over Floyd's death and more generally against police brutality have turned violent in some places, particularly after sunset.
State and local police and other authorities are the - response on this.
They're the ones on the streets making arrests.
But the federal government is obviously helping out.
I'm told by a senior Justice Department official that Attorney General William Barr has dispatched riot teams from the Federal Bureau of Prisons to Washington, D.C., and Miami to help authorities there with the unrest.
These are called Special Operations Response Teams.
They have special training to respond to things like prison riots.
The attorney general also dispatched an FBI hostage rescue team late last night in D.C. to help police here as some of the protests turned violent.
And I'm told that federal law enforcement will be out in force again in D.C. this evening.

SHAPIRO: How else are federal authorities involved?

LUCAS: Well, there are a couple of tracks here.
So the FBI and the Justice Department are conducting an investigation into Floyd's death, looking to see whether any of his constitutional rights were violated.
These are tough cases, though, because the standard of proof is really high.
Federal prosecutors would have to prove that the officer who had his knee on Floyd's neck, as we saw in that video, was acting with the specific intent of violating Floyd's civil rights.
And if you remember the case of Eric Garner, the African American man who died in police custody in New York in 2014, all of which was captured on video as well, the Justice Department ultimately decided not to bring civil rights charges against the officer involved in that instance.

The FBI is also, of course, investigating the violence that has broken out in some cities in connection with these protests.
FBI field offices across the country have set up command posts to help coordinate and share information with state and local police to help them out.
The FBI tends to set these sorts of things up after big complicated events such as terrorist attacks, school shootings.
So these do - these sort of command posts are set up from time to time.
State and local police are, as I said, they're the first responders.
But I'm told the FBI is interviewing people who have been arrested to see whether any federal laws have been broken, such as, say, crossing state lines to conduct violence.

SHAPIRO: Now, the attorney general blamed far-left radicals for the violence and then the president tweeted that he would designate antifa a terrorist organization, which is not actually something he can do.
So bring us up to speed on what's happening there.

LUCAS: There has been a ton of conflicting statements from authorities about who's behind this violence.
Barr and the president, as you said, are blaming the far left.
Others have pointed the finger at the far right.
The common thread at this point is that the public really hasn't seen any evidence to support either of those claims.
As for the president's threat to declare antifa a terrorist organization, it's important to make clear here that, you know, antifa isn't a single group.
It's not a monolith.
It doesn't have a hierarchy.
It's really more of a diffuse movement of far-left ideologies and activists who oppose fascism, often actively on the streets.
The other thing is that legal experts say there is no authority under which the president could designate antifa a terrorist group.
And that's because the laws that allow for a terrorist designation apply to foreign groups only, not to domestic ones.
And then this also, of course, would really implicate First Amendment issues as well, First Amendment-protected issues.

SHAPIRO: That's NPR justice correspondent Ryan Lucas.

Thanks, Ryan.

LUCAS: Thank you.

Copyright © 2020 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 10: 
President Obama Signs New EpiPen Law To Protect Children with Asthma and Severe Allergies, And Help Their Families To Breathe Easier


President Barack Obama signs H.R. 2094, the School Access to Emergency Epinephrine Act, during a signing ceremony in the Oval Office, Nov.
13, 2013.
(Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)


Today in the Oval Office, President Obama signed into law the School Access to Emergency Epinephrine Act, which will encourage schools to plan for severe asthma attacks and allergic reactions, and provide millions of families with greater peace of mind.

The law makes an important change to the Children’s Asthma Treatment Grants Program and other federal asthma programs, which authorizes the Department of Health and Human Services to give funding preferences to states for asthma-treatment grants if they: maintain an emergency supply of epinephrine (EpiPens), if they permit trained personnel of the school to administer epinephrine, and if they develop a plan for ensuring trained personnel are available to administer epinephrine during all hours of the school day.

The President knows in signing this new law, that the anxiety felt by millions of parents, every time their child with asthma or severe allergies heads into school, will begin to fade.
An estimated 9.5% of American children suffer from asthma, and between 4 and 6% of children are affected by food allergies, either of which can strike in an instant, and have life threatening consequences.
But the significance of this threat can be dramatically reduced as more schools respond to this law, and begin to prepare for these emergencies.

It is a promising day for millions of children and families who live life just one mishap away from catastrophe.
As states and schools begin to update and upgrade their response capacity, we will all learn to breathe a little easier.



####
document number 11: 
7/27/96: Olympic Park Bombing



A pipe bomb explosion kills two people at Olympic Centennial Park in Atlanta.




####
document number 12: 
Shared Themes, Tactics in White Supremacist and Islamist Extremist Propaganda


LEFT: ISIS photo.
RIGHT: Atomwaffen Division photo


Islamist extremist propaganda and white supremacist propaganda not only reflect similar themes and memes in the ways they recruit and incite, but pose the shared danger of reeling in followers and potentially driving them to violent acts.

Terror attacks are increasingly hybrid, and so are the attackers — extremists are feeding off each other’s best practices.
The web is a terror marketplace where a group speaks not only to its own adherents and an individual doesn’t just shout into the void when posting bomb-making techniques or target suggestions, but they all contribute to an ample open-source library of D.I.Y. extremist training and incitement that crosses group allegiances and ideologies.

White supremacist groups and purveyors of racism and anti-Semitism have found an online base for incitement and recruitment much like ISIS honed the medium to further their goals of building ranks and inspiring lone terrorists.
Domestic extremists are also posting memes and metal-soundtrack training-camp videos that echo the stylized violence and call to arms used with devastating effect by ISIS and al-Qaeda.

It’s critical to understand the shared characteristics and in some cases even mimicking of extremist messaging.
As we’ve spent years battling and formulating counternarrative strategies to Islamist terror recruitment and incitement, there are lessons to apply as white supremacists utilize some of the same recruitment methods, social media strategy, and tactics tailored to their own cause.

Meme mimicking



Last summer, a meme circulated using the text for Nike’s Colin Kaepernick ad — "Believe in something, even if it means sacrificing everything" — along with the shoe company’s trademark swoosh and slogan "Just do it."
Instead of the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback, though, the photo was of Timothy McVeigh, the anti-government extremist and domestic terrorist who was executed in 2001 for killing 168 people in the April 19, 1995, bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.

McVeigh wouldn’t be the only terrorist to be associated with the "Just do it" meme last summer by online propagandists hoping to spur extremists into violent action.
Another featured late al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden with his quote, "The war is between us and the Jews.
Any country that steps into the same trench as the Jews has only itself to blame."
This was followed by, "Just do it."
And yet another Nike-themed meme featured Christchurch mosque shooter Brenton Tarrant and an "accelerationist" line from his lengthy manifesto, in which he stated his attack was intended "to create an atmosphere of fear and change in which drastic, powerful and revolutionary action can occur."

Using current events to stoke grievances



Dozens of KKK recruitment flyers were left in front of homes in Loudoun County, Va., this past July.
The Sterling, Va., neighborhood targeted is located just off of Virginia State Route 7, also known as the Harry Flood Byrd Highway, named for the late segregationist governor and senator.
An 11-year-old girl was leading a local petition drive to rename the road Freedom Highway, leading the Klan to use that as the anchor for their recruitment pitch.
Similarly, ISIS propaganda goes into lengthy pitches arguing that Muslims are oppressed in the West and therefore need to join their ranks.
Both take current events and paint an aggrieved narrative on why people need to join their fight.

Pitch based on recruits’ feelings of inadequacy



Both types of extremist propaganda often appeal to potential recruits who feel inadequate in some way, claiming that by committing an attack in the name of their cause the assailant will gain notoriety or an importance they hadn’t attained before.

Appealing to existing grievances



Both types of propaganda lean heavily on tapping into grievances that may be already harbored by potential recruits, and converting those grievances into acts of terror.

Ideological dominion



White nationalist and Islamic extremist propaganda both include themes of dominion, trying to draw would-be recruits with claims that theirs is the ideology that will win and reign in the end.

Accelerationism



White supremacists and Islamist extremists often share the belief that societal collapse will hasten their aims to construct either a white or Islamic civilization out of the ruins.
Accelerationists seek to wedge themselves into chaos and hasten the arrival of societal collapse.

Training camp propaganda



The Atomwaffen Division recruitment video "Accelerating Vengeance!"
has been readily available on online file sharing sites.
With a soundtrack of heavy techno music, masked, camouflage-clad adherents are shown conducting rifle drills, practicing hand-to-hand combat and target shooting in the woods along with shooting on a separate snowy range.
Similarly, Islamist extremists regularly release videos and photos trying to appeal to machismo, propaganda that simultaneously aims to warn foes of their toughness and hook recruits who want to act tough.

Copycatting



The copycatting memes tell would-be attackers that if someone else pulled off an attack, so can they.
A meme posted on a white nationalist Telegram channel last summer portrayed a masked individual walking away from a parked Ryder van — the same rental company used by McVeigh in his truck bomb — with the words, "America is dead!
Long live America!"
And ISIS frequently cites the 2016 Nice vehicle ramming attack and other truck attacks — with effectiveness, as we’ve seen copycats.
Last month Jerry Drake Varnell, 26, of Sayre, Okla., was sentenced to 25 years in prison for plotting to blow up BancFirst in downtown Oklahoma City with a truck bomb.
Government officials said Varnell liked anti-government groups on Facebook and messages referencing McVeigh, and investigators found on the day of his arrest a speech written by Varnell that included conspiracy theories about McVeigh.

Anti-government themes



Terrorists often cite specific events as their reasons for committing deadly acts, often drawn from a pool of incidents used for incitement by like-minded extremists.
McVeigh went to the site of the Waco siege to show support for the Branch Davidian compound and used it as a springboard into anti-government extremism.
A white nationalist propaganda producer last summer distributed an image portraying the Waco compound burning, with FBI agents in the foreground, and the words, "April 19, 1993 – And we did FUCKING nothing."
ISIS propaganda often depicts attacks on U.S. government institutions.
Both white supremacists and Islamist extremists tell followers that the government is committing crimes and that they need to step up and counter it.

Revenge themes



Revenge messages cutting across ideologies regularly circulate through online extremist messaging, though the veneer of how terrorists try to justify their actions often slips to reveal operatives motivated by hate who robotically quote what an online mentor said about avenging a cause du jour.

Promotion of weapons and tactics



Propaganda is frequently used to urge would-be terrorists to utilize simple or easily attainable weapons to carry out attacks.
And the propaganda — including on weapons selection, training or constructing explosive devices — produced by either group is being put onto the internet in an open-source library for either or anyone to use.

Threats against social media



Twitter, Telegram and Facebook all have been the targets of online threats from white supremacists and Islamist extremists for their censorship or removal of extremist accounts.
Social media is important to extremists not just to recruit and inspire but to document attacks: Pittsburgh shooter Robert Bowers posted on social media "I’m going in" before his attack and New Zealand mosque shooter Brenton Tarrant linked to his attack livestream and told the like-minded to "do your part."

Promoting attacks



Propaganda from both ideologies will seize — quickly — on violent current events to promote their causes and try to instigate further attacks.
There is an urgency around this propaganda as extremists hope that the like-minded conduct their own attacks sooner rather than later, keeping communities on edge and the news cycle in their corner.

Anti-Semitism and threats against the Jewish community



Anti-Semitism themes and overt threats against the Jewish community are a reflection of strongly shared ideology between white supremacists and Islamist extremists, and frequently a cornerstone of their propaganda as well as target of their terror attacks.

Coronavirus themes



White supremacists have been filling online forums and social media with conspiracy theories blaming Jews and ethnic minorities for the coronavirus, and groups that paper campuses and other locations with hate fliers and stickers have been including the virus in their propaganda.
"The last thing they want," ISIS said in their

al-Naba

newsletter last month, is for jihadists to be currently preparing new attacks "similar to the strikes of Paris, London, Brussels and other places" while the security apparatus is focused on responding to – or has its ranks reduced by – coronavirus.
Terrorists "must intensify the pressure" while countries are weakened as financial difficulties and "preoccupations with protecting their countries" will weaken efforts to confront terrorism, ISIS predicted.

While these examples culled from the trove of online extremist propaganda do not hold back with violent imagery and themes, it’s critical to note that as extremist methods and messaging have evolved white supremacists and Islamist extremists have paid special attention to their need to be palatable — so they can reel in new members with a more mainstream tone, and so they get less pushback from portions of the populace who generally agree with some of their less-extremist promoted messages.

These promotional manipulations try to cloak or soften the core aims of the extremists, which remain unchanged but with greater acceptance or more people turning a blind eye will become a greater threat.
Tracking all messaging — the violent, hate-filled, and seemingly innocuous — gives not only an insight into extremists’ branding strategies but pinpoints operatives and what new audiences they may be targeting.


Bridget Johnson is the Managing Editor for Homeland Security Today.
A veteran journalist whose news articles and analyses have run in dozens of news outlets across the globe, Bridget first came to Washington to be online editor and a foreign policy writer at The Hill.
Previously she was an editorial board member at the Rocky Mountain News and syndicated nation/world news columnist at the Los Angeles Daily News.
Bridget is a senior fellow specializing in terrorism analysis at the Haym Salomon Center.
She is a Senior Risk Analyst for Gate 15, a private investigator and a security consultant.
She is an NPR on-air contributor and has contributed to USA Today, The Wall Street Journal, New York Observer, National Review Online, Politico, New York Daily News, The Jerusalem Post, The Hill, Washington Times, RealClearWorld and more, and has myriad television and radio credits including Al-Jazeera, BBC and SiriusXM.



####
document number 13: 
The Oklahoma City Bombing &amp;amp; The Trial of Timothy McVeigh






Prosecutor Joseph Hartzler began his opening statement in the Timothy McVeigh trial by reminding the jury of the terror and the heartbreak: "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, April 19th, 1995, was a beautiful day in Oklahoma City -- at least it started out as a beautiful day.
The sun was shining.
Flowers were blooming.
It was springtime in Oklahoma City.
Sometime after six o'clock that morning, Tevin Garrett's mother woke him up to get him ready for the day.
He was only 16 months old.
He was a toddler; and as some of you know that have experience with toddlers, he had a keen eye for mischief.
He would often pull on the cord of her curling iron in the morning, pull it off the counter top until it fell down, often till it fell down on him.
That morning, she picked him up and wrestled with him on her bed before she got him dressed.
She remembers this morning because that was the last morning of his life...." A bomb carried in a Ryder truck exploded in front of the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City at 9:02 a.m. on April 19, 1995.
The bomb claimed 168 innocent lives.
That a homegrown, war-decorated American terrorist named Timothy McVeigh drove and parked the Ryder truck in the handicap zone in front of the Murrah Building there is little doubt.
In 1997, a jury convicted McVeigh and sentenced him to death.
The federal government, after an investigation involving 2,000 agents, also charged two of McVeigh's army buddies, Michael Fortier and Terry Nichols, with advance knowledge of the bombing and participation in the plot.
Despite considerable evidence linking various militant white supremacists to the tragedy in Oklahoma City, no other persons faced prosecution for what was--until September 11, 2001--the worst act of terrorism ever on American soil.
The Oklahoma City bombing trials raise questions more interesting than the answers they provide.
How, in four years, can an army sergeant and Green Beret aspirant turn so violently against the government he served?
If there had been no Waco, would there have been no Oklahoma City?
Did McVeigh want to be captured?
Why did the government only bring charges against three men in connection with the bombing, when compelling evidence suggests that others played significant roles in the crime?
We do not have clear answers to any of these questions--but some possible answers to these and other intriguing questions have come into better focus in the years since the McVeigh and Nichols trials.
The childhood of Timothy McVeigh in Lockport, New York was far from idyllic.
His parents divorced in 1978, when Tim was ten, and for the remainder of his school years he lived mainly with his father, Bill McVeigh.
Scrawny and unathletic, "Noodle" McVeigh became a target for neighborhood bullies.
He attributes a lifelong hatred for bullies of all kinds (a class which, in his view, included an overreaching federal government) to early beatings on softball diamonds and head spinning "swirlies" in flushing toilets.
It is possible that McVeigh's fascination with guns, dating to pre-teen years spent admiring his grandfather's .22-caliber rifle, might have something to do with his view of weapons as the great equalizer.
He dedicated himself to developing his marksmanship skills, spending hours shooting holes in soft-drink cans in a ravine.
By age 14, Tim McVeigh's interests included survivalism.
He began stockpiling food and camping equipment in preparation for possible nuclear attack or a communist overthrow of the United States government.
Although McVeigh performed well on standardized tests in high school, school and its social life had considerably less appeal for him than his world of guns, fringe movements, and science fiction books.
He struck classmates as somewhat introverted and disengaged, and his only extracurricular activity was track.
Under the entry "future plans" in his high school yearbook, McVeigh wrote: "Take it as it comes, buy a Lamborghini, California girls."
Despite his reference to "California girls," McVeigh seemed uncomfortable around women, never had a girlfriend, and--despite his own contentions to the contrary-- might have remained a virgin throughout his entire life.
For two years following high school graduation, McVeigh briefly attended a computer school in Buffalo and took on a series of short-term jobs--then, in May 1988, he enlisted in the U. S.
Army.
In basic training, the loner McVeigh found a friend in his platoon leader, Terry Nichols, who shared his conservative and somewhat paranoid political views.
McVeigh seemed to fit well into the structured life of the military, performing well enough to be promoted to sergeant.
He served in Fort Riley, Kansas, where he met Michael Fortier, the man who would later provide key testimony against him in the Oklahoma City bombing trial.
From Fort Riley, McVeigh headed to the Persian Gulf War, where for four months he drove a Bradley Fighting Vehicle and, for his efforts, earned a bronze star.
McVeigh seemed well-suited to the details of military life; his army years were probably his best years.
Nonetheless, after realizing that he lacked the "right stuff" during the first day of a Green Beret try-out, McVeigh requested and received an honorable discharge in December 1991.
McVeigh's life darkened in the year following his discharge.
By the end of 1991, McVeigh was living with his father again in upstate New York, near Buffalo, and working for near minimum wage as a security guard.
He fought through bouts of serious depression and thoughts of suicide.
Politically, he moved further and further from the mainstream.
He began espousing increasingly angry views of U. S. foreign policy, gun control, and what he believed were conspiracies involving the United Nations.
In a March 1992 letter to the Lockport Union-Sun, McVeigh wrote, "AMERICA IS IN DECLINE....Do we have to shed blood to reform the current system?"
According to McVeigh, he first began thinking of violent action against the federal government in August 1992 following news of a federal government shoot-out with survivalist Randy Weaver in the Idaho woods.
In January 1993, McVeigh turned in his security company badge, sold most of his belongings, packed his bags, left New York, and began a transient life of gun shows, stays with army buddies, and short-term jobs.
Gun shows provided McVeigh with money and a steady stream of acquaintances who shared his anti-gun control and anti-government views.
No event did more to radicalize McVeigh than did the stand-off near Waco, Texas between members of the Branch Davidians, a religious cult headed by David Koresh, and U. S.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF).
On February 28, 1993, 80 armed BATF agents tried to execute a warrant to search for illegal weapons at the Mount Carmel compound of the Davidians.
The raid ended badly, with four agents and six Branch Davidians killed.
What would turn out to be a 51-day stand-off began.
The federal government's actions so infuriated McVeigh that he traveled to Texas in March to sell bumper stickers with slogans such as "Fear the Government that Fears Your Gun."
McVeigh was watching television at the farm of his army buddy, Terry Nichols, in Michigan on April 19 when the government forces (including the FBI and army) launched their attack against the heavily fortified Davidian compound.
Tanks rammed holes in the compound and agents fired CS gas inside.
Pyrotechnic devices fired into the building turned it into a raging inferno.
When it was over, 74 men, women, and children were found dead inside the compound.
McVeigh, in Michigan, sat stunned and appalled: "What is this?
What has America become?"
He decided the time would come when he would strike back.
The Widening Conspiracy There is no shortage of people in the United States who have serious beefs with the federal government.
In addition to the anti-gun control crowd, there are anti-tax fanatics, white supremacists who resent government's race and immigration policies, and a wide variety of persons who think the United States government is full of communists or "one-world-government" proponents.
Timothy McVeigh had most of these complaints with the government, and over the next two years would find himself in the company of many who shared much of his somewhat paranoid world view.
At an April 1993 gun show in Tulsa, for example, McVeigh met Andreas Strassmeir, the grandson of a founder of the Nazi party and then the head of security for Elohim City, a 400-acre compound on the Arkansas-Oklahoma border founded by a white supremacist.
(There is interesting, but inconclusive, evidence suggesting that Strassmeir might have been a federal undercover operative.)
In Kingman, Arizona, McVeigh renewed his friendship with army buddy Michael Fortier, an anti-gun control protester with a passion for far-right politics.
In the fall of 1993, McVeigh and Terry Nichols made their first visit to Elohim City, a hotbed of anti-government activity--including a plot to blow up a federal building in Oklahoma City.
(For McVeigh, it would be the first of at least two, and most likely four or more visits to the compound.)
In 1994, McVeigh's activities became overtly criminal.
According to FBI reports, it is probable that McVeigh participated in a series of bank robberies around the Midwest with a gang from Elohim City in an effort to raise money for projects involving anti-government violence.
McVeigh cased banks, and most likely drove the getaway car in some of the heists.
He also plotted and carried out, with the help of either Nichols or Elohim City residents, an armed robbery of an Arkansas gun dealer that he had befriended at various gun shows.
Joined by Michael Fortier, he stole various items from an Arizona National Guard armory.
Some of McVeigh's activities bordered on the bizarre.
He turned his modest Arizona home into a bunker, renounced his U. S. citizenship, and began making and exploding homemade bombs.
(According to a book by two inmates who later shared death row with McVeigh, his recipe for the bomb he would use in Oklahoma City came from a patriot friend, who used his chemistry degree from the University of California as a Meth manufacturer.)
About this same time, McVeigh's own use of methamphetamines increased.
He became increasingly vocal in promoting his apocalyptic world view.
In July 1994, he and Michael Fortier trespassed on to "Area 51," a top secret government reservation for weapons testing located near Roswell, New Mexico.
Two months later, he journeyed to Gulfport, Mississippi to investigate a rumor that the town had become a staging area for United Nations troops and equipment.
A farewell letter written by McVeigh in July to his boyhood friend, Steve Hodge, revealed the evolution of his thinking: "I have sworn to uphold and defend the Constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic, and I will....I have come to peace with myself, my God, and my cause.
Blood will flow in the streets, Steve, Good vs Evil.
Free men vs.
Socialist Wannabe Slaves.
Pray it is not your blood, my friend."
In September 1994, according to both McVeigh and the findings of a federal grand jury, that the ex-Army sergeant began plotting to blow up the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
The date identified by the grand jury for the start of the conspiracy was September 13.
On that day, McVeigh was--according to FBI records showing a receipt for a motel room in Vian, Oklahoma--visiting Elohim City, and probably participating with other anti-government activists in a series of military maneuvers.
September 13 also marked the day, coincidentally or not, that a new federal law banning assault weapons became law.
By the end of September 1994, McVeigh's plot (we will, in this trial commentary, call it "McVeigh's plot," although there is a body of evidence to suggest that others played significant planning roles as well) started to unfold.
On September 22, he rented a storage unit in Herington, Kansas, that would later be used to house explosive materials.
A week later, Terry Nichols bought a ton of ammonium nitrate, a key ingredient in the bomb that would be used in Oklahoma City.
Ammonium nitrate is a commonly used agricultural fertilizer and the purchase was made at a farm cooperative in McPherson, Kansas.
October 1994 was a busy month for McVeigh and his co-conspirators.
He and Terry Nichols bought a second ton of ammonium nitrate from the same farm cooperative.
A burglary at a quarry near Marion, Kansas on October 3 netted McVeigh and Nichols a supply of dynamite and blasting caps.
Wearing a biker disguise, McVeigh purchased nearly $3000 work of nitromethane, a racing fuel used in bomb construction, from a Dallas track.
In between these supply-gathering missions, McVeigh found time to visit Oklahoma City to inspect the building he had targeted, and to calculate his own position at the time the bomb would be likely to explode.
McVeigh also managed to fit in two separate visits in October to Kingman, Arizona.
He rented another storage locker and, with Michael Fortier watching, tested the explosive mixture that he had chosen for the Murrah Building bombing.
McVeigh tried to recruit Fortier to assist in the actual bombing, but Fortier balked, and asked, "What about all the people?"
McVeigh told Fortier to think of the victims as "storm troopers in Star Wars" who, although individually innocent, "are guilty because they work for the evil empire."
Despite the persuasive efforts of McVeigh, Fortier made clear that he had no desire to be in Oklahoma City on the day of the bombing.
McVeigh's close association with white supremacists and other government-haters at Elohim City continued throughout 1994.
In addition to joining in bank robberies, there is evidence to suggest that people at the compound were involved in the bombing plot itself.
According to BATF informant Carol Howe, who worked undercover in Elohim City, Andreas Strassmeir and Dennis Mahon made the first of three trips to Oklahoma City in November to inspect possible bombing targets.
Howe informed her supervisor of these developments.
The BATF was sufficiently alarmed by Howe's reports to plan a raid on Elohim City, but following a February 1995 meeting with officials from the FBI and U. S.
Attorney's Office, the planned operation is called off.
There is no way of knowing whether the raid, if conducted, might have prevented the tragedy in Oklahoma City--but that remains a real possibility.
In March 1995, when Terry Nichols told McVeigh that he wanted to back out of the bombing plan, McVeigh had to turn elsewhere for the assistance he would need in the final stages of the plot.
There is speculation that his help came from Elohim City.
(McVeigh wanted to be seen at the mastermind of the plot, and in his statements discounted the role of others in the conspiracy, leaving uncertainty as to exactly what roles others played.
A polygraph test taken by McVeigh showed him to be truthful in regards to his own role in the bombing, but "evasive" concerning the roles played by other persons not charged in the bombing.)
Fellow death row inmates David Hammer and Jeffrey Paul, in their 2004 book Secrets Worth Dying For, contend that McVeigh revealed to them that he and four members of the Aryan Republican Army, with Elohim City connections, met several times in March and April 1995 in the Arizona desert, where "they conducted 'dry runs' of the 'planting the bomb and getting away.'"
The two authors also contend that McVeigh told them he met in Las Vegas a man he called "Poindexter," who provided detailed knowledge on bomb assembly, and would visit with him again at McVeigh's room at the Imperial Hotel in Kingman.
On April 5, two minutes after a phone call to the Ryder Rental Company made from his motel room in Kingman, McVeigh placed a call to Elohim City.
The contents of that phone conversation are unknown, of course, but there has been considerable speculation in books and on Internet sites, that McVeigh sought to coordinate bombing plans with some compound residents.
Three days after his phone call, McVeigh arrived in Oklahoma, where he was seen at Lady Godiva's, a Tulsa strip club, in the presence of Elohim City militants Andreas Strassmeir and a third man, who some people suggest might have been Michael Brescia.
A security camera in a dressing room at the strip club apparently recorded McVeigh telling a stripper, "On April 19, you'll remember me for the rest of your life."
In the final days leading up to the bombing, Aryan Republican Army members (and perhaps bomb expert "Poindexter") converged in east central Kansas where final preparations were being made.
(This is a matter of dispute, as the trial record only hints at this possibility and McVeigh told authorities otherwise, but a growing body of evidence suggests several Elohim City activists played critical roles in April 1995.
This history is supported by the chronology of events reported in Secrets Worth Dying For, based on McVeigh's alleged death row revelations.
Any book written by convicted death row inmates raises credibility concerns, but the inmates' account corresponds fairly well with the timing of various sightings of "John Doe No.
2" and other unidentified persons, as reported by witnesses interviewed by the FBI.)
The men most likely camped at Geary Lake, the same place where McVeigh said he received some cash from Terry Nichols on April 14, before he checked into room 25 at the Dreamland Motel in Junction City.
A Junction pizza delivery man later told an FBI interviewer that he delivered a pizza to "Bob Kling" in room 25 that night--and that the man taking the pizza was not Timothy McVeigh.
"Bob Kling" was, most likely, ARA member Scott Stedeford.
On Easter Sunday, April 16, McVeigh , Nichols, and (probably) "John Doe #2" drove to Oklahoma City.
McVeigh and John Doe #2 drove in McVeigh's newly purchased Mercury Marquis, while Nichols followed behind in his pickup.
McVeigh parked the old Marquis, which was to be his getaway car, in a lot near the Murrah Building, and then rode back to the Dreamland Motel with Nichols and John Doe #2.
On the afternoon of April 17, McVeigh pulled out of Elliot's Body Shop in Junction City with a Ryder rental truck.
In a form he filled out at Elliot's, McVeigh said he planned to use the truck for a four-day trip to Omaha.
McVeigh left the Dreamland Motel in the Ryder truck about 4:30 the next morning.
Stories of what happened next diverge considerably.
Either alone (one story) or after picking up Brescia (another story), McVeigh drove to his Herington storage locker where he (or they) met (depending on which account you believe) either bomb expert Poindexter or Terry Nichols.
(According to Secrets Worth Dying For, McVeigh said Nichols was "a no-show" at the locker.
McVeigh is said to have complained, "He and Mike [Fortier] were men who liked to talk tough, but in the end their bitches and kids ruled.")
The men--whoever they were--loaded bags of fuses and drums of nitromethane into the truck.
In his authorized biography, McVeigh claimed that he and Nichols also loaded bags of fertilizer into the truck and then completed the assembly of the bomb later that morning at Geary Park.
In this version of events, McVeigh set off alone later that afternoon, heading south down I-35 for Oklahoma.
He parked the Ryder truck for the night near Ponca City, Oklahoma, sleeping in the cab.
(In his alleged prison revelations to inmates, on the other hand, McVeigh reportedly said that the fertilizer had previously been loaded into a second "decoy" truck, and that two trucks--not one--were driven to Oklahoma City that afternoon.
Assembly of the bomb was said to have been completed that night at a warehouse in the Oklahoma capitol city with the help of Poindexter, McVeigh, and A.R.A. member Richard Guthrie.
In this far more dramatic version of events, related in Secrets Worth Dying For, Poindexter was killed by a throat slashing administered by an A.R.A. member after bomb assembly was completed.
The explanation given to McVeigh for the killing: "Soldier, he was only hired help, not one of us.")
FBI interviews provide some support for each of the conflicting stories.
The couple who own the Santa Fe Trail Diner in Herington, the site of McVeigh's storage locker, told federal interviewers that they saw McVeigh, Nichols, and a third man who resembled John Doe #2 having breakfast in their establishment around 8 a.m. on the morning before the bombing.
Witnesses also reported seeing a Ryder truck and another pickup truck at Geary Lake an hour or two later.
Owners of a steakhouse in Perry, Oklahoma told agents they saw McVeigh and "a stocky companion" eat dinner in their restaurant around 7 in the evening.
What to make of these various sightings?
We might never know exactly who assisted McVeigh in the 24 hours leading up to the dreadful events of April 19, but the McVeigh-and-McVeigh-alone theory, and the McVeigh-and-just-Nichols theory, both seem to stretch credulity.
For Timothy McVeigh, April 19 stood out as a date with multiple historical meanings.
It was, probably foremost to the former visitor to Waco, the date in 1995 that the federal government launched its attack on the Branch Davidian compound in Texas, with the horrific loss of life that resulted.
McVeigh also knew April 19 to be the date in 1775 that the Battle of Lexington occurred, marking the beginning of the armed uprising by colonialists against British control.
In his getaway car, McVeigh included a bumper sticker that he expected--probably wanted--authorities to find.
The bumper sticker carried the quote of Revolutionary War patriot Samuel Adams, "WHEN THE GOVERNMENT FEARS THE PEOPLE, THERE IS LIBERTY.
WHEN THE PEOPLE FEAR THE GOVERNMENT, THERE IS TYRANNY."
Below the slogan, McVeigh scribbled his own words: "Maybe now, there will be liberty!"
April 19 of 1995, McVeigh also certainly knew, was to be the scheduled day of execution in Arkansas for a white supremacist Richard Snell, formerly of Elohim City, who had--years earlier--targeted the Murrah Building in Oklahoma City as the site for a potential bombing.
On the morning that he would become the greatest mass murderer in American history, McVeigh chose to wear a T-shirt with a drawing of Abraham Lincoln and the words shouted by John Wilkes Booth after his assassination of the president, "SIC SEMPER TYRANNIS" ("thus ever to tyrants").
In the version of events related by McVeigh in his authorized biography, American Terrorist, he began driving south in his Ryder truck from Ponca City about 7 a.m. on the morning of April 19, having made an "executive decision" to move up the scheduled timing of the bombing.
In the more sensational version of events related in Secrets Worth Dying For, McVeigh, with Michael Brescia in the passenger seat of the Ryder truck, left an Oklahoma City warehouse around 8 a.m. At 8:45, McVeigh pulled the truck into an Oklahoma City tire store to ask directions.
According to the store employee who talked with McVeigh, a second man wearing a baseball cap sat in the passenger seat of the vehicle as McVeigh sought directions to a downtown address six blocks away.
A video camera at 8:55 a.m. captured the Ryder truck as it headed toward the center of downtown Oklahoma City.
The Ryder truck drove up NW 5th street shortly before 9:00.
McVeigh lit two fuses.
He parked the truck in the handicapped zone in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, locked the vehicle, and strode quickly away in the direction of a nearby YMCA building.
At 9:02 a.m., shortly after many parents had dropped their toddlers off at the Murrah Building's second-floor daycare center, the bomb exploded, taking with it much of the building, killing 167 people, injuring another 509, and changing forever the lives of thousands of Oklahomans.
(The damage to the building was so extensive that many people believe there were in fact two blasts--the second coming from an ATF secure area where explosives being stored (illegally) were ignited by the truck bomb.
Both seismic evidence and witness testimony supports the "two blast theory.")
Two news stories that followed the bombing reported raised interesting questions concerning a wider conspiracy.
In Arkansas, prison officials reported that in the days preceding April 19, Richard Snell repeatedly told them to expect a big bombing or explosion on the day of his execution.
Execution came for Snell exactly twelve hours after the Oklahoma City bombing.
Meanwhile, in Spokane, Washington, the local paper reported that Chevie Kehoe, a former Elohim City resident staying at a motel in the city, woke early on April 19 to demand that the motel owner turn the lobby television to CNN, telling him that "something is going to happen and it's going to wake people up."
The motel owner said that Kehoe became ecstatic when news of the Oklahoma City bombing was announced.
"It's about time!"
Kehoe is reported to have exclaimed.
About 80 minutes after the bombing, Charles Hanger, an Oklahoma Highway Patrol officer, noticed a McVeigh's Mercury driving north on I-35, about twenty miles from the Kansas border.
The car carried no license plate, so the officer pulled the driver over.
When McVeigh turned out to be carrying a concealed weapon without a permit, in addition to driving without a license or a vehicle registration, he was arrested, booked, and placed in the county jail in Perry, Oklahoma.
Later that day, amidst the gruesome rubble of downtown Oklahoma City, federal agents found the vehicle identification number for the Ryder truck.
Within hours, investigators were in a car headed for Junction City, Kansas, to see who might have rented it.
The Investigation and Trial Preliminaries By April 21, investigatory trails had led to Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols.
Initial speculation that the bombing was the work of Arab extremists faded away.
The lead FBI investigator at Waco, Clinton Van Zandt of the FBI's Behavioral Science Unit, recognized the importance of April 19 and told other agents to look for a "white male...with military experience and ...a member of some militia group...angry for what happened at Ruby Ridge and Waco."
Agents visiting Elliot's Body Shop in Junction City, the shop that rented the Ryder truck, came away with a description of renter "Robert Kling," a/k/a "John Doe No.
1," a white male with a brush cut and a strong nose.
The manager of the Dreamland Motel told them that "John Doe No.
1" looked very much like Timothy McVeigh, who had rented a room at her motel in the days before the bombing.
A former co-worker in New York also told authorities that "John Doe No.
1" might be the man he knew as Timothy McVeigh.
A computer check in Washington came up with information that surprised and delighted investigators: Timothy McVeigh was, at present, sitting in a Noble County, Oklahoma jail on unrelated misdemeanor charges.
Federal agents traveled to Perry, where they picked up McVeigh--who had been wondering all the while what was taking authorities so long--and transported him by helicopter to Tinker Air Force Base, near Oklahoma City.
Before his arraignment that evening, McVeigh met briefly with two court-appointed attorneys.
"Yes," he told them, "I did the bombing."
Once authorities had the name of a suspect, it wasn't difficult to identify McVeigh's army buddy, Terry Nichols, as an additional target of suspicion.
McVeigh had listed the Nichols farm in Michigan as his home address.
Nichols turned himself into authorities in Herington, Kansas, and consented to a search of his home.
Searchers found guns, stolen goods, anti-government books, ammonium nitrate, a receipt for the purchase of the ammonium nitrate, Primadet explosive, a hand-drawn map of downtown Oklahoma City, and a telephone card used by McVeigh to make calls in his hunt for bomb-making materials.
Ultimately, the federal government would bring charges against three men: McVeigh and Nichols for conspiracy to bomb a federal building and for the murder of federal agents, and Michael Fortier for not informing authorities about the bombing and lying to federal agents about his knowledge of the bombing.
Prosecutors never fully explained the decision not to bring charges against others suspected of playing significant roles in the bombing conspiracy, but apparently they simply believed they lacked the compelling evidence necessary to meet the Constitution's high "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard of guilt.
Fortier agreed to assist government prosecutors in return for not facing conspiracy charges, a promise of leniency for his admitted crimes, and the promise that his wife would not be charged.
Grand jury indictments of McVeigh and Nichols came on August 11, 1995, three days after Michael and Lori Fortier presented their testimony in the case.
Fearing a fair trial was not possible in Oklahoma, U. S.
District Judge Richard Matsch moved the trial to Denver.
Judge Matsch also ordered that McVeigh and Nichols be tried separately, with McVeigh's trial to begin first.
After receiving authorization from Attorney General Janet Reno to do so, prosecutors announced that they would seek the death penalty in both cases.
The Trial of Timothy McVeigh Timothy McVeigh never got the trial he wanted.
He tried to convince his attorneys to present a "necessity defense" that might allow him to present evidence of the "crimes" of the federal government that his bombing was meant to prevent.
McVeigh believed that at least some jurors, were they to hear about the government's actions at Ruby Ridge and Waco, would find the bombing justified.
(Given the carnage he caused, McVeigh's hope of sympathetic jurors seems far from realistic.)
More importantly to McVeigh, a political trial might provide him the opportunity to make his case against an overreaching federal government in the larger court of public opinion.
McVeigh's lead lawyer was Stephen Jones, a Republican activist who had taken on other politically charged cases.
Upon his appointment as lead counsel, Jones told reporters, "My role is as old as the Constitution.
Whether I perform professionally will be determined by how I conduct myself, and whether my client is satisfied..." The relationship between McVeigh and his attorney soon became strained, when McVeigh suspected Jones as being the source of a leak reported in the New York Times that McVeigh had confessed.
McVeigh also resented Jones's refusal to push his "necessity defense," a decision made by Jones after research convinced him that McVeigh had no chance of establishing--as he would be required to do to raise the defense--that the federal government put McVeigh in "imminent danger."
Rather than employ a necessity defense, Jones opted for a strategy of trying to poke what holes he could in the prosecution's case, thus raising a question of reasonable doubt.
In addition, Jones believed that McVeigh was taking far more responsibility for the bombing than was justified and that McVeigh, although clearly guilty, was only a player in a large conspiracy.
It fit McVeigh's personality, Jones thought, for him to sacrifice himself for others who shared his anti-government cause.
Jones spent considerable resources investigating McVeigh's possible ties to Arab terrorists and Andreas Strassmeir and his Elohim City associates.
So much so, in fact, that McVeigh took to sarcastically calling his attorney "Sherlock Jones."
"He was investigating me, not defending me," McVeigh complained.
In his book about the McVeigh case, Others Unknown: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma City Bombing Conspiracy, Jones wrote: "It strains belief to suppose that this appalling crime was the work of two men--any two men...Could [this conspiracy] have been designed to protect and shelter everyone involved?
Everyone, that is, except my client..." Jones considered presenting McVeigh as "the designated patsy" in a cleverly designed plot, but his own client opposed the strategy and Judge Matsch, after a hearing, ruled the evidence concerning a larger conspiracy to be too insubstantial to be admissible.
Jury selection in the McVeigh case began on March 31, 1997, a month after the appearance of a national news story reporting that McVeigh told defense investigators that he bombed the Murrah Building at the time of day he did to "increase the body count."
The poorly timed leak probably came when a member of the defense team turned over to the Dallas Morning News a computer disk containing FBI reports, not knowing that the contents of their interview with McVeigh also were on the same disk.
McVeigh became convinced that any chance of landing a sympathetic juror, or receiving sympathetic treatment from the judge, evaporated with the story about his interview.
Over the course of three weeks, a jury of seven men and five women was chosen.
Opening statements began on April 24, in front of a packed courtroom at the Byron C.
Rogers Courthouse and a closed-circuit viewing audience in Oklahoma that included many victims and their families.
Lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler, a wheelchair-bound multiple sclerosis victim, led with a dramatic opening statement that reminded jurors of the tremendous losses suffered two years earlier: "All the children I mentioned died, and more--dozens and dozens of other men, women, children, cousins, loved ones, grandparents, grandchildren, ordinary Americans going about their business.
And the only reason they died...is they were in a building owned by a government that Timothy McVeigh so hated....And the man who committed this act is sitting in this courtroom behind me.
After he did so, he fled the scene--and he even avoided damaging his eardrums because he had earplugs with him."
Hartzler scornfully attacked McVeigh's attempts to portray himself as a modern-day patriot "like Patrick Henry and Samuel Adams."
Hartzler reminded jurors that "our forefathers didn't fight British women and children; they fought other soldiers."
And, he said, they fought them fair: "They didn't plant bombs, and run away wearing earplugs."
In his opening statement for the defense, Stephen Jones charged that the government conducted a hasty two-week investigation of the actual bombing and then spent the next two years zeroing in on his client.
Critical evidence was ignored, Jones charged, such as the eyewitness testimony of bombing victim Daina Bradley that the person she saw emerge from the Ryder truck by the federal building was black-haired, stocky, and had an olive complexion--"John Doe No.
2," not Timothy McVeigh.
Jones saved his greatest wrath for star prosecution witness Michael Fortier, who he labeled as story-changing, dope-dealing conniver.
Jones concluded his statement by promising jurors that by the end of the trial he would show them that his client was innocent of all charges.
The prosecution presented 137 witnesses.
Some witnesses told of their own heart wrenching losses they suffered that April day.
Michelle Rausch, a former journalism student, told of interviewing McVeigh as he peddled anti-government bumper stickers outside of government barricades near Waco in 1993.
FBI agents described how they traced evidence found in the bombing to McVeigh.
Charles Hanger of the Oklahoma Highway Patrol described his arrest of McVeigh on I-35, while other law enforcement authorities described evidence found in McVeigh's car.
Tim Chambers, the Texas seller of the racing fuel nitromethane, described his dealings with the person he now knew to be McVeigh.
McVeigh showed little emotion during the nearly month-long parade to the stand.
The Fortiers, Michael and Lori, filled in some of the most critical gaps in the prosecution's case.
Lori Fortier admitted to some of her own failings and misdeeds, including drug use, lying to authorities, trafficking in stolen guns, wrapping blasting caps in wrapping paper, and helping McVeigh forge a driver's license.
Nonetheless, she presented convincing evidence of McVeigh's key role in the bombing.
For example, Lori Fortier described the day McVeigh laid about fifteen soup cans out on the floor of her trailer to illustrate the type of bombs he hoped to assemble in his truck.
In his long and rambling cross-examination, Stephen Jones forced Lori to concede that she could have saved 168 lives with a simple phone call, but chose not to, and that she had been promised full immunity by the federal government in exchange for her incriminating testimony.
Michael Fortier proved to be the state's most important witness.
Fortier could take jurors from the Timothy McVeigh he knew immediately after Waco, who at that time had unleashed a torrent of anti-government venom, to the one poised and ready to send a message to that same government in Oklahoma City.
Fortier told jurors how McVeigh, in his living room in October 1994, had provided him with detailed plans to blow up the Murrah Building.
By then, according to Fortier, McVeigh had already chosen the date for his attack to mark the second anniversary of the Waco assault.
One of the most memorable moments of the trial came when Joseph Hartzler asked Fortier, "Did you have any discussion [with Tim McVeigh] about the deaths that such a bomb would cause?"
Fortier replied, "I asked him about that...
I said, 'What about all the people?'
And he explained to me, using the terms from the movie "Star Wars" -- he explained to me that he considered all those people to be as if they were the storm troopers in the movie "Star Wars."
They may be individually innocent; but because they are part of the -- the evil empire, they were -- they were guilty by association."
Fortier also revealed his own reaction, when he first heard the news from Oklahoma City: "Oh my God, he did it."
The most painful testimony for McVeigh probably came from his own sister, Jennifer McVeigh.
Her obvious reluctance to offer testimony that hurt her brother made what she did say all the more damaging.
Jennifer outlined for jurors her brother's evolution from a government critic to a militant poised to take violent action against what he saw as a lawless government.
She revealed that he told her of his experience with explosives, as well as the ominous words that ended one of his last letters to her: "Won't be back forever."
The defense presented 25 witnesses over just a one-week period.
The most effective witness for the defense might have been Dr. Frederic Whitehurst, who provided a damning critique of the FBI's sloppy investigation of the bombing site and its handling of other key evidence Unfortunately for McVeigh, while Whitehurst could show that FBI techniques made contamination of evidence possible, he could not point to any evidence (such as trace evidence of explosives on the shirt McVeigh wore on April 19) that he knew to be contaminated.
The task of the defense team was all but impossible.
They could not come up with a single alibi witness.
They faced the reality that McVeigh had told dozens of people of his hatred of the government, and had told a friend that he planned to take violent action on April 19.
Rental agreements and a drawing of downtown Oklahoma City linked him to the blast.
He carried earplugs in his car driving north from Oklahoma City forty minutes after the explosion.
How could it all be explained away?
In his closing argument, Jones pointed the jury to what the prosecution didn't have, such as an eyewitness that placed him near the Murrah Building around 9:00 a.m. on April 19, or the lack of McVeigh's fingerprints on the ignition key for the Ryder rental truck recovered in the bombing investigation.
The Fortiers' lacked credibility, Jones said, they were just out to save their own skins.
For a sympathetic defendant charged in a less heinous crime, poking holes in a prosecution case can sometimes be enough.
Not in this case, however.
After over twenty-three hours of deliberation, the jury returned its verdict: guilty on all eleven counts.
McVeigh sat expressionless at the defense table as the verdict was read.
The same jury listened to evidence in the penalty phase of the trial, with McVeigh's life hanging in the balance.
Much of the testimony did not make for easy listening.
Stories of heartbreak and loss, told by victims and rescue workers and medical personnel.
Doctors told of sawing off legs of people trapped under the rubble.
Wifes told of husbands who would never see their children graduate or get marries.
Firefighters described recurring nightmares they had experienced since the tragedy.
Police officers described finding dead babies in what was once the second-floor daycare center at the Murrah Building.
In the face of this powerful testimony, testimonials from McVeigh's Army buddies and the argument of Stephen Jones that his client was not motivated by hatred of the victims paled in comparison.
The last two witnesses for the defense probably were its strongest, Timothy's divorced parents, Bill and Mickey McVeigh.
Mickey cried as she read a statement she had composed the previous night.
She told jurors that Tim was "a child any mother could be proud of; I still to this day cannot believe he would have caused this devastation."
Bill McVeigh introduced a fifteen-minute videotape showing his young son meeting Santa Claus, playing with his toy train, and appearing to be a normal, All-American boy.
"I love Tim," Bill McVeigh said simply.
For two days, the jury discussed McVeigh's fate.
On Friday, June 13, 1997, the jury's decision was announced: death.
Two months later, McVeigh returned to Judge Matsch's courtroom to hear the formal pronouncement of his sentence.
Asked by the judge if he had anything to say, McVeigh quoted from a 1928 dissenting opinion by Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis: "'Our government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher.
For good or ill, it teaches the whole people by its example.'
That's all I have."
After Matsch pronounced the sentence of death, McVeigh was escorted from the courtroom by federal marshals, to be readied for transport to Florence, Colorado, the site of a federal prison known as "Supermax."
The Trials of Terry Nichols and Epilogue Six months after McVeigh received his sentence, co-conspirator Terry Nichols escaped a death verdict in his trial before Judge Matsch.
Although found guilty of conspiracy to bomb a federal building and eight counts of involuntary manslaughter, the jury acquitted Nichols on charges of using a weapon of mass destruction and first-degree murder.
The jury apparently agreed with the argument of defense attorney Michael Tigar that Nichols had decided to drop out of the conspiracy some time before the actual bombing.
The fact that Nichols spent April 19, 1995 at home with his family in Kansas probably figured large in the jury's decision.
The jury might also have been swayed by Nichols's show of remorse--he cried at several points during the testimony--, which stood in stark contrast to McVeigh's courtroom demeanor.
(In May 2004, Nichols found his life spared a second time, when a jury deadlocked on his sentence after he had been found guilty in state court in Oklahoma on 160 charges of first-degree murder.)
In a sixteen-page letter written to Judge Matsch prior to the imposition of sentence, Nichols wrote, "If I did anything to contribute to the cause of the Oklahoma City bombing I am sorry, I'm truly sorry."
He implied in his letter that he never believed McVeigh would actually go through with his bombing plan.
On June 4, 1998, Nichols listened as Judge Matsch pronounced his sentence: life in prison without parole.
Authorities delivered Nichols to the same Colorado prison that housed McVeigh and other celebrity inmates including Unabomber Theodore Kacyznski and the mastermind of the first attack in 1993 on New York's World Trade Center, Ramzi Yousef.
(In a letter to the authors of American Terrorist, Kacyznski said he "liked" McVeigh, who he described as "an adventurer by nature" who, at the same time, was "very intelligent" and expressed ideas that "seemed rational and sensible.")
Later in 1998, Michael Fortier joined McVeigh and Nichols at the Supermax.
Fortier plead guilty to lying to federal officials and failing to warn authorities of McVeigh's planned bombing.
He received a twelve-year sentence.
(Fortier was released from prison in January 2006, after serving ten years and six months of his sentence.)
McVeigh's appeals, as expected, met no success.
In September 1999, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed his conviction.
Six months later, the United States Supreme Court refused to hear his appeal.
Authorities moved McVeigh to the only federal death row (there had been no federal executions since 1963) at a penitentiary at Terre Haute, Indiana in July 1999.
The American public got its first chance to hear directly from McVeigh in March 2000, when prison officials allowed Ed Bradley of the CBS show "Sixty Minutes" to interview him.
McVeigh set only one condition for the interview: that Bradley not ask him whether he bombed the Murrah Building.
He still had last-ditch appeals to think about.
In the over thirty-minute interview, McVeigh offered his thoughts about politics, about his service in the Gulf War, and about what he perceived to be his unfair trial.
Still, however, he showed no remorse over what happened in Oklahoma City.
He blamed the U. S. government for teaching, through its aggressive foreign policy and application of the death penalty, the lesson that "violence is an acceptable option."
In January 2001, McVeigh decided to drop all his appeals and expedite his own execution.
Judge Matsch set May 16 as the day he would receive a lethal injection.
However, just six days before the scheduled execution, the Justice Department revealed that it found over 4,000 pages of evidence that should have been turned over to McVeigh's defense attorneys before trial, but wasn't.
Attorney General John Ashcroft announced that McVeigh's execution would be postponed for one month to allow the defense to inspect the newly released documents.
Angered by what he saw as another example of the government's unfairness, McVeigh at first decided to renew his appeals, but after his first appeal was rejected on June 7, McVeigh announced that he was ready to die.
On the evening of June 10, McVeigh had his last meal (two pints of chocolate chip ice cream).
The next morning, he woke early to take a shower.
At 7 a.m., dressed in a shirt, khaki pants and slip-on shoes, McVeigh was led to the execution chamber.
A "restraint team" strapped him to a padded gurney.
The curtains over glass panels separating the chamber from a viewing area parted to allow 30 people to directly watch McVeigh's final moments, while another 300 victims and relatives gathered in Oklahoma City to watch the event on closed-circuit television.
McVeigh made no final statement, but instead left a handwritten copy of the poem "Invictus," with its concluding lines, "I am the master of my fate / I am the captain of my soul."
Warden Harley Lappin read an official statement and then said, "We are ready."
As the drugs entered his veins, McVeigh lifted his head and made eye contact with witnesses in the viewing room.
He was pronounced dead at 7:14 a.m.
Three months after his execution, on September 11, 2001, McVeigh lost his claim to having masterminded the worst terrorist attack in United States history when hijacked airplanes slammed into the two towers of the World Trade Center.

McVeigh Trial Homepage



####
document number 14: 
Top U.S. General Reveals New Info On Niger Ambush


https://ht.cdn.turner.com/cnn/big/politics/2017/10/23/niger-investigation-dunford-raju-dnt-tsr.cnn_1691228_ios_440.mp4 (CNN) — The US troops attacked in N...

https://ht.cdn.turner.com/cnn/big/politics/2017/10/23/niger-investigation-dunford-raju-dnt-tsr.cnn_1691228_ios_440.mp4


(CNN) — The US troops attacked in Niger were on their way back to their operating base when they were ambushed by 50 ISIS fighters, according to Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen.
Joseph Dunford, who provided a timeline of the attack on Monday.

Four US and five Nigerien soldiers were killed and two Americans were wounded in the attack that occurred on October 4, but details of what happened remain murky more than two weeks after the incident as investigators work to determine precisely what happened, a US official has told CNN.

During the Pentagon briefing Monday, Dunford clarified that the US troops requested additional support about an hour after the firefight began.

Remotely piloted aircraft arrived overhead within minutes of the request for help.
French Mirage jets arrived on the scene approximately one hour later — two hours after the troops made initial contact with enemy forces.

"It’s important to note when they didn’t ask for support for that first hour, my judgment would be that that unit thought they could handle the situation without additional support," Dunford said.
"And so well we’ll find out in the investigation exactly why it took an hour for them to call."

Dunford said there is no indication that the US troops were operating outside their orders at the time of the ambush.

"I don’t have any indication right now to believe or to know that they did anything other than operate within the orders that they were given," Dunford said.
"That’s what the investigation’s all about.
So I think anyone that speculates about what special operations forces did or didn’t do is doing exactly that, they’re speculating."

Still, Dunford said the military will be investigating if the planned reconnaissance mission changed.

"It was planned as a reconnaissance mission.
What happened after they began to execute, in other words, did the mission change?
That is one of the questions that’s being asked.
It’s a fair question but I can’t tell you definitively the answer to that question.
But, yes, we’ve seen the reports, we’ve seen the speculation," he said.

One US soldier, Sgt.
La David Johnson, was separated from his 12-member team as it was ambushed by 50 ISIS fighters, and his body was recovered 48 hours later nearly a mile away from the central scene of the ambush in Niger, four administration officials familiar with the early assessment of what happened had told CNN on Friday.

Dunford said Monday that he could not definitely confirm reports that Johnson was found nearly a mile away but that those details would come to light as part of the investigation.

"I think we owe the families and American people transparency," Dunford said.

That commitment to providing more information to the families of fallen soldiers — and the American people — comes as lawmakers continue to raise questions over exactly what transpired in Niger and the extent of US military involvement in Africa.

Senate Armed Services Chairman John McCain has criticized the Pentagon and Trump administration for not being forthcoming about the attack — threatening a subpoena last week — and Defense Secretary James Mattis went to Capitol Hill on Friday to meet with both McCain and South Carolina Republican Sen.
Lindsey Graham.

"One of the fights I’m having with the administration is the armed services committee is not getting enough information," McCain said Monday on ABC’s "The View."
"We deserve it."

In the aftermath of the ambush, several key lawmakers have said they didn’t know the US had troops in Niger.

"I didn’t know there was 1,000 troops in Niger," Graham said on NBC’s "Meet the Press" Sunday.

But the Pentagon and White House have previously notified Congress about the US mission in Niger several times this year.

The Pentagon is still looking at the exact circumstances of how and when Johnson became separated, but is emphasizing that the search for Johnson began immediately and dozens of US forces were quickly moved to Niger’s capital Niamey to be ready to go into the field, which some did.

Joint Staff Director Lt. Gen.
Kenneth F.
McKenzie told reporters last week that US, French and Nigerien forces "never left the battlefield" until Johnson was found.

Experts working for US Africa Command are trying to establish an hour-by-hour timeline of what happened as part of a comprehensive investigation that includes all the military branches and elements of US intelligence agencies that were involved in the mission.

CNN previously reported that the French Mirage jets that arrived overhead within 30 minutes of the firefight to fly low passes in an attempt to disperse the attackers did not have permission to drop bombs.

But on Friday, US officials said that French jets did have authority to bomb but did not because pilots could not readily identify enemy forces in this firefight and did not want to risk hitting US and Nigerien troops.

Monday’s Pentagon briefing with Dunford offers a particularly striking change of tone from the public response of the Trump administration in the wake of the Niger attack.

President Donald Trump’s response to the attack has drawn some criticism, particularly his public feud with a Democratic congresswoman over a condolence call he made to Johnson’s widow.

On Monday, Trump tweeted shortly after Myeshia Johnson, the widow of Sgt.
La David Johnson, discussed her disappointment with the call on "Good Morning America" Monday morning, saying the President stumbled on her husband’s name and suggesting the only reason he knew it was because the report was right in front of him.

"I had a very respectful conversation with the widow of Sgt.
La David Johnson, and spoke his name from beginning, without hesitation!"
Trump tweeted.

Johnson said she was distraught over Trump’s alleged oversights during the call, which came as the Johnson family and Rep.
Frederica Wilson, D-Florida, who is a friend of the family, rode in a limo to receive Johnson’s body from Dover Air Force Base.

"(The call) made me cry because I was very angry at the tone of his voice," she said.

A White House official described Monday’s briefing as an intentional effort to move beyond the heated rhetoric from all sides on this — including from the West Wing.

An official said White House chief of staff John Kelly and people throughout the West Wing would be watching the briefing.

Kelly became embroiled in the controversy after taking to the White House podium last week to say that he was "stunned" by Wilson’s decision to take to the press to criticize Trump for his call with a Gold Star widow, though he did not dispute Wilson’s claim that Trump told the widow of Sgt.
La David Johnson that he "knew what he signed up for."

Kelly also claimed that Wilson took credit for securing "$20 million" in federal funding to build a new FBI field office in Miami in 2015, a claim that was proven erroneous by a video of the dedication ceremony posted Friday by the Sun Sentinel.

Accusing her of being an "empty barrel," Kelly said Wilson focused more on her own actions than the heroism of the two FBI agents for whom the new building had been named.

Kelly and Dunford maintain a close personal relationship and Kelly described Dunford as his best friend during the White House briefing last week.



####
document number 15: 
Chilling CCTV footage shows men who killed children in petrol bomb attack ‘laughing and joking’



controls":true,"preload":"none","autoplay":false,"videoId":1695400,"duration":66,"pageURL":"CCTV-shows-child-killers-laughing-joking-crime","title":"CCTV shows child killers laughing and joking before crime","poster":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/pix\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/13\/4C9627CF00000578-0-image-a-4_1527164797149.jpg","linkBaseURL":"","plugins":{"related-videos":{"channel":"news"},"autoplay-next-video":{"countdown_time":3,"channel":"news"},"tracking":{"fbia":false,"amp":false},"ads-setup":{"masterVideoTag":"http:\/\/pubads.g.doubleclick.net\/gampad\/ads?iu=%2F5765%2Fmetro.video=s=1=vp=xml_vast3=1","adCancelTimeout":5000,"adsEnabled":false,"nonAdServable":false,"prebidToken":"nobid","pos":"metro.video.ctp","bidders":["grapeshotPlugin"]},"social-share":{"embedUrl":"https:\/\/metro.co.uk\/video\/embed\/1695400","linkUrl":"https:\/\/metro.co.uk\/video\/cctv-shows-child-killers-laughing-joking-crime-1695400\/","nonEmbeddable":false},"sources":{"renditions":[{"frameHeight":270,"controllerType":null,"videoContainer":"MP4","url":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/480x270_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","uploadTimestampMillis":null,"encodingRate":372736,"displayName":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/480x270_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","frames":1657,"audioOnly":false,"id":null,"videoDuration":66000,"videoCodec":"H264","remoteStreamName":null,"framesPerSecond":0,"frameWidth":480,"size":3184782,"referenceId":null,"remoteUrl":null},{"frameHeight":360,"controllerType":null,"videoContainer":"MP4","url":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/640x360_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","uploadTimestampMillis":null,"encodingRate":712704,"displayName":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/640x360_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","frames":1657,"audioOnly":false,"id":null,"videoDuration":66000,"videoCodec":"H264","remoteStreamName":null,"framesPerSecond":0,"frameWidth":640,"size":5994749,"referenceId":null,"remoteUrl":null},{"frameHeight":540,"controllerType":null,"videoContainer":"MP4","url":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/960x540_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","uploadTimestampMillis":null,"encodingRate":1019904,"displayName":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/960x540_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","frames":1657,"audioOnly":false,"id":null,"videoDuration":66000,"videoCodec":"H264","remoteStreamName":null,"framesPerSecond":0,"frameWidth":960,"size":8585888,"referenceId":null,"remoteUrl":null},{"frameHeight":576,"controllerType":null,"videoContainer":"MP4","url":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/1024x576_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","uploadTimestampMillis":null,"encodingRate":1327104,"displayName":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/1024x576_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4","frames":1657,"audioOnly":false,"id":null,"videoDuration":66000,"videoCodec":"H264","remoteStreamName":null,"framesPerSecond":0,"frameWidth":1024,"size":11123180,"referenceId":null,"remoteUrl":null}],"iOSRenditions":[{"frameHeight":270,"controllerType":null,"videoContainer":"M2TS","url":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/480x270_M2TS_6654622549369206234.m3u8","uploadTimestampMillis":null,"encodingRate":372736,"displayName":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/480x270_M2TS_6654622549369206234.m3u8","frames":null,"audioOnly":false,"id":null,"videoDuration":66000,"videoCodec":"H264","remoteStreamName":null,"framesPerSecond":0,"frameWidth":480,"size":508,"referenceId":null,"remoteUrl":null},{"frameHeight":360,"controllerType":null,"videoContainer":"M2TS","url":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/640x360_M2TS_6654622549369206234.m3u8","uploadTimestampMillis":null,"encodingRate":679936,"displayName":"https:\/\/videos.metro.co.uk\/video\/met\/2018\/05\/24\/6654622549369206234\/640x360_M2TS_6654622549369206234.m3u8","frames":null,"audioOnly":false,"id":null,"videoDuration":66000,"videoCodec":"H264","remoteStreamName":null,"framesPerSecond":0,"frameWidth":640,"size":508,"referenceId":null,"remoteUrl":null}]}}}" src="https://videos.metro.co.uk/video/met/2018/05/24/6654622549369206234/640x360_MP4_6654622549369206234.mp4">

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video




####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = car bombing
document number 1: 
The Oklahoma City Bombing &amp;amp; The Trial of Timothy McVeigh






Prosecutor Joseph Hartzler began his opening statement in the Timothy McVeigh trial by reminding the jury of the terror and the heartbreak: "Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, April 19th, 1995, was a beautiful day in Oklahoma City -- at least it started out as a beautiful day.
The sun was shining.
Flowers were blooming.
It was springtime in Oklahoma City.
Sometime after six o'clock that morning, Tevin Garrett's mother woke him up to get him ready for the day.
He was only 16 months old.
He was a toddler; and as some of you know that have experience with toddlers, he had a keen eye for mischief.
He would often pull on the cord of her curling iron in the morning, pull it off the counter top until it fell down, often till it fell down on him.
That morning, she picked him up and wrestled with him on her bed before she got him dressed.
She remembers this morning because that was the last morning of his life...." A bomb carried in a Ryder truck exploded in front of the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City at 9:02 a.m. on April 19, 1995.
The bomb claimed 168 innocent lives.
That a homegrown, war-decorated American terrorist named Timothy McVeigh drove and parked the Ryder truck in the handicap zone in front of the Murrah Building there is little doubt.
In 1997, a jury convicted McVeigh and sentenced him to death.
The federal government, after an investigation involving 2,000 agents, also charged two of McVeigh's army buddies, Michael Fortier and Terry Nichols, with advance knowledge of the bombing and participation in the plot.
Despite considerable evidence linking various militant white supremacists to the tragedy in Oklahoma City, no other persons faced prosecution for what was--until September 11, 2001--the worst act of terrorism ever on American soil.
The Oklahoma City bombing trials raise questions more interesting than the answers they provide.
How, in four years, can an army sergeant and Green Beret aspirant turn so violently against the government he served?
If there had been no Waco, would there have been no Oklahoma City?
Did McVeigh want to be captured?
Why did the government only bring charges against three men in connection with the bombing, when compelling evidence suggests that others played significant roles in the crime?
We do not have clear answers to any of these questions--but some possible answers to these and other intriguing questions have come into better focus in the years since the McVeigh and Nichols trials.
The childhood of Timothy McVeigh in Lockport, New York was far from idyllic.
His parents divorced in 1978, when Tim was ten, and for the remainder of his school years he lived mainly with his father, Bill McVeigh.
Scrawny and unathletic, "Noodle" McVeigh became a target for neighborhood bullies.
He attributes a lifelong hatred for bullies of all kinds (a class which, in his view, included an overreaching federal government) to early beatings on softball diamonds and head spinning "swirlies" in flushing toilets.
It is possible that McVeigh's fascination with guns, dating to pre-teen years spent admiring his grandfather's .22-caliber rifle, might have something to do with his view of weapons as the great equalizer.
He dedicated himself to developing his marksmanship skills, spending hours shooting holes in soft-drink cans in a ravine.
By age 14, Tim McVeigh's interests included survivalism.
He began stockpiling food and camping equipment in preparation for possible nuclear attack or a communist overthrow of the United States government.
Although McVeigh performed well on standardized tests in high school, school and its social life had considerably less appeal for him than his world of guns, fringe movements, and science fiction books.
He struck classmates as somewhat introverted and disengaged, and his only extracurricular activity was track.
Under the entry "future plans" in his high school yearbook, McVeigh wrote: "Take it as it comes, buy a Lamborghini, California girls."
Despite his reference to "California girls," McVeigh seemed uncomfortable around women, never had a girlfriend, and--despite his own contentions to the contrary-- might have remained a virgin throughout his entire life.
For two years following high school graduation, McVeigh briefly attended a computer school in Buffalo and took on a series of short-term jobs--then, in May 1988, he enlisted in the U. S.
Army.
In basic training, the loner McVeigh found a friend in his platoon leader, Terry Nichols, who shared his conservative and somewhat paranoid political views.
McVeigh seemed to fit well into the structured life of the military, performing well enough to be promoted to sergeant.
He served in Fort Riley, Kansas, where he met Michael Fortier, the man who would later provide key testimony against him in the Oklahoma City bombing trial.
From Fort Riley, McVeigh headed to the Persian Gulf War, where for four months he drove a Bradley Fighting Vehicle and, for his efforts, earned a bronze star.
McVeigh seemed well-suited to the details of military life; his army years were probably his best years.
Nonetheless, after realizing that he lacked the "right stuff" during the first day of a Green Beret try-out, McVeigh requested and received an honorable discharge in December 1991.
McVeigh's life darkened in the year following his discharge.
By the end of 1991, McVeigh was living with his father again in upstate New York, near Buffalo, and working for near minimum wage as a security guard.
He fought through bouts of serious depression and thoughts of suicide.
Politically, he moved further and further from the mainstream.
He began espousing increasingly angry views of U. S. foreign policy, gun control, and what he believed were conspiracies involving the United Nations.
In a March 1992 letter to the Lockport Union-Sun, McVeigh wrote, "AMERICA IS IN DECLINE....Do we have to shed blood to reform the current system?"
According to McVeigh, he first began thinking of violent action against the federal government in August 1992 following news of a federal government shoot-out with survivalist Randy Weaver in the Idaho woods.
In January 1993, McVeigh turned in his security company badge, sold most of his belongings, packed his bags, left New York, and began a transient life of gun shows, stays with army buddies, and short-term jobs.
Gun shows provided McVeigh with money and a steady stream of acquaintances who shared his anti-gun control and anti-government views.
No event did more to radicalize McVeigh than did the stand-off near Waco, Texas between members of the Branch Davidians, a religious cult headed by David Koresh, and U. S.
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF).
On February 28, 1993, 80 armed BATF agents tried to execute a warrant to search for illegal weapons at the Mount Carmel compound of the Davidians.
The raid ended badly, with four agents and six Branch Davidians killed.
What would turn out to be a 51-day stand-off began.
The federal government's actions so infuriated McVeigh that he traveled to Texas in March to sell bumper stickers with slogans such as "Fear the Government that Fears Your Gun."
McVeigh was watching television at the farm of his army buddy, Terry Nichols, in Michigan on April 19 when the government forces (including the FBI and army) launched their attack against the heavily fortified Davidian compound.
Tanks rammed holes in the compound and agents fired CS gas inside.
Pyrotechnic devices fired into the building turned it into a raging inferno.
When it was over, 74 men, women, and children were found dead inside the compound.
McVeigh, in Michigan, sat stunned and appalled: "What is this?
What has America become?"
He decided the time would come when he would strike back.
The Widening Conspiracy There is no shortage of people in the United States who have serious beefs with the federal government.
In addition to the anti-gun control crowd, there are anti-tax fanatics, white supremacists who resent government's race and immigration policies, and a wide variety of persons who think the United States government is full of communists or "one-world-government" proponents.
Timothy McVeigh had most of these complaints with the government, and over the next two years would find himself in the company of many who shared much of his somewhat paranoid world view.
At an April 1993 gun show in Tulsa, for example, McVeigh met Andreas Strassmeir, the grandson of a founder of the Nazi party and then the head of security for Elohim City, a 400-acre compound on the Arkansas-Oklahoma border founded by a white supremacist.
(There is interesting, but inconclusive, evidence suggesting that Strassmeir might have been a federal undercover operative.)
In Kingman, Arizona, McVeigh renewed his friendship with army buddy Michael Fortier, an anti-gun control protester with a passion for far-right politics.
In the fall of 1993, McVeigh and Terry Nichols made their first visit to Elohim City, a hotbed of anti-government activity--including a plot to blow up a federal building in Oklahoma City.
(For McVeigh, it would be the first of at least two, and most likely four or more visits to the compound.)
In 1994, McVeigh's activities became overtly criminal.
According to FBI reports, it is probable that McVeigh participated in a series of bank robberies around the Midwest with a gang from Elohim City in an effort to raise money for projects involving anti-government violence.
McVeigh cased banks, and most likely drove the getaway car in some of the heists.
He also plotted and carried out, with the help of either Nichols or Elohim City residents, an armed robbery of an Arkansas gun dealer that he had befriended at various gun shows.
Joined by Michael Fortier, he stole various items from an Arizona National Guard armory.
Some of McVeigh's activities bordered on the bizarre.
He turned his modest Arizona home into a bunker, renounced his U. S. citizenship, and began making and exploding homemade bombs.
(According to a book by two inmates who later shared death row with McVeigh, his recipe for the bomb he would use in Oklahoma City came from a patriot friend, who used his chemistry degree from the University of California as a Meth manufacturer.)
About this same time, McVeigh's own use of methamphetamines increased.
He became increasingly vocal in promoting his apocalyptic world view.
In July 1994, he and Michael Fortier trespassed on to "Area 51," a top secret government reservation for weapons testing located near Roswell, New Mexico.
Two months later, he journeyed to Gulfport, Mississippi to investigate a rumor that the town had become a staging area for United Nations troops and equipment.
A farewell letter written by McVeigh in July to his boyhood friend, Steve Hodge, revealed the evolution of his thinking: "I have sworn to uphold and defend the Constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic, and I will....I have come to peace with myself, my God, and my cause.
Blood will flow in the streets, Steve, Good vs Evil.
Free men vs.
Socialist Wannabe Slaves.
Pray it is not your blood, my friend."
In September 1994, according to both McVeigh and the findings of a federal grand jury, that the ex-Army sergeant began plotting to blow up the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City.
The date identified by the grand jury for the start of the conspiracy was September 13.
On that day, McVeigh was--according to FBI records showing a receipt for a motel room in Vian, Oklahoma--visiting Elohim City, and probably participating with other anti-government activists in a series of military maneuvers.
September 13 also marked the day, coincidentally or not, that a new federal law banning assault weapons became law.
By the end of September 1994, McVeigh's plot (we will, in this trial commentary, call it "McVeigh's plot," although there is a body of evidence to suggest that others played significant planning roles as well) started to unfold.
On September 22, he rented a storage unit in Herington, Kansas, that would later be used to house explosive materials.
A week later, Terry Nichols bought a ton of ammonium nitrate, a key ingredient in the bomb that would be used in Oklahoma City.
Ammonium nitrate is a commonly used agricultural fertilizer and the purchase was made at a farm cooperative in McPherson, Kansas.
October 1994 was a busy month for McVeigh and his co-conspirators.
He and Terry Nichols bought a second ton of ammonium nitrate from the same farm cooperative.
A burglary at a quarry near Marion, Kansas on October 3 netted McVeigh and Nichols a supply of dynamite and blasting caps.
Wearing a biker disguise, McVeigh purchased nearly $3000 work of nitromethane, a racing fuel used in bomb construction, from a Dallas track.
In between these supply-gathering missions, McVeigh found time to visit Oklahoma City to inspect the building he had targeted, and to calculate his own position at the time the bomb would be likely to explode.
McVeigh also managed to fit in two separate visits in October to Kingman, Arizona.
He rented another storage locker and, with Michael Fortier watching, tested the explosive mixture that he had chosen for the Murrah Building bombing.
McVeigh tried to recruit Fortier to assist in the actual bombing, but Fortier balked, and asked, "What about all the people?"
McVeigh told Fortier to think of the victims as "storm troopers in Star Wars" who, although individually innocent, "are guilty because they work for the evil empire."
Despite the persuasive efforts of McVeigh, Fortier made clear that he had no desire to be in Oklahoma City on the day of the bombing.
McVeigh's close association with white supremacists and other government-haters at Elohim City continued throughout 1994.
In addition to joining in bank robberies, there is evidence to suggest that people at the compound were involved in the bombing plot itself.
According to BATF informant Carol Howe, who worked undercover in Elohim City, Andreas Strassmeir and Dennis Mahon made the first of three trips to Oklahoma City in November to inspect possible bombing targets.
Howe informed her supervisor of these developments.
The BATF was sufficiently alarmed by Howe's reports to plan a raid on Elohim City, but following a February 1995 meeting with officials from the FBI and U. S.
Attorney's Office, the planned operation is called off.
There is no way of knowing whether the raid, if conducted, might have prevented the tragedy in Oklahoma City--but that remains a real possibility.
In March 1995, when Terry Nichols told McVeigh that he wanted to back out of the bombing plan, McVeigh had to turn elsewhere for the assistance he would need in the final stages of the plot.
There is speculation that his help came from Elohim City.
(McVeigh wanted to be seen at the mastermind of the plot, and in his statements discounted the role of others in the conspiracy, leaving uncertainty as to exactly what roles others played.
A polygraph test taken by McVeigh showed him to be truthful in regards to his own role in the bombing, but "evasive" concerning the roles played by other persons not charged in the bombing.)
Fellow death row inmates David Hammer and Jeffrey Paul, in their 2004 book Secrets Worth Dying For, contend that McVeigh revealed to them that he and four members of the Aryan Republican Army, with Elohim City connections, met several times in March and April 1995 in the Arizona desert, where "they conducted 'dry runs' of the 'planting the bomb and getting away.'"
The two authors also contend that McVeigh told them he met in Las Vegas a man he called "Poindexter," who provided detailed knowledge on bomb assembly, and would visit with him again at McVeigh's room at the Imperial Hotel in Kingman.
On April 5, two minutes after a phone call to the Ryder Rental Company made from his motel room in Kingman, McVeigh placed a call to Elohim City.
The contents of that phone conversation are unknown, of course, but there has been considerable speculation in books and on Internet sites, that McVeigh sought to coordinate bombing plans with some compound residents.
Three days after his phone call, McVeigh arrived in Oklahoma, where he was seen at Lady Godiva's, a Tulsa strip club, in the presence of Elohim City militants Andreas Strassmeir and a third man, who some people suggest might have been Michael Brescia.
A security camera in a dressing room at the strip club apparently recorded McVeigh telling a stripper, "On April 19, you'll remember me for the rest of your life."
In the final days leading up to the bombing, Aryan Republican Army members (and perhaps bomb expert "Poindexter") converged in east central Kansas where final preparations were being made.
(This is a matter of dispute, as the trial record only hints at this possibility and McVeigh told authorities otherwise, but a growing body of evidence suggests several Elohim City activists played critical roles in April 1995.
This history is supported by the chronology of events reported in Secrets Worth Dying For, based on McVeigh's alleged death row revelations.
Any book written by convicted death row inmates raises credibility concerns, but the inmates' account corresponds fairly well with the timing of various sightings of "John Doe No.
2" and other unidentified persons, as reported by witnesses interviewed by the FBI.)
The men most likely camped at Geary Lake, the same place where McVeigh said he received some cash from Terry Nichols on April 14, before he checked into room 25 at the Dreamland Motel in Junction City.
A Junction pizza delivery man later told an FBI interviewer that he delivered a pizza to "Bob Kling" in room 25 that night--and that the man taking the pizza was not Timothy McVeigh.
"Bob Kling" was, most likely, ARA member Scott Stedeford.
On Easter Sunday, April 16, McVeigh , Nichols, and (probably) "John Doe #2" drove to Oklahoma City.
McVeigh and John Doe #2 drove in McVeigh's newly purchased Mercury Marquis, while Nichols followed behind in his pickup.
McVeigh parked the old Marquis, which was to be his getaway car, in a lot near the Murrah Building, and then rode back to the Dreamland Motel with Nichols and John Doe #2.
On the afternoon of April 17, McVeigh pulled out of Elliot's Body Shop in Junction City with a Ryder rental truck.
In a form he filled out at Elliot's, McVeigh said he planned to use the truck for a four-day trip to Omaha.
McVeigh left the Dreamland Motel in the Ryder truck about 4:30 the next morning.
Stories of what happened next diverge considerably.
Either alone (one story) or after picking up Brescia (another story), McVeigh drove to his Herington storage locker where he (or they) met (depending on which account you believe) either bomb expert Poindexter or Terry Nichols.
(According to Secrets Worth Dying For, McVeigh said Nichols was "a no-show" at the locker.
McVeigh is said to have complained, "He and Mike [Fortier] were men who liked to talk tough, but in the end their bitches and kids ruled.")
The men--whoever they were--loaded bags of fuses and drums of nitromethane into the truck.
In his authorized biography, McVeigh claimed that he and Nichols also loaded bags of fertilizer into the truck and then completed the assembly of the bomb later that morning at Geary Park.
In this version of events, McVeigh set off alone later that afternoon, heading south down I-35 for Oklahoma.
He parked the Ryder truck for the night near Ponca City, Oklahoma, sleeping in the cab.
(In his alleged prison revelations to inmates, on the other hand, McVeigh reportedly said that the fertilizer had previously been loaded into a second "decoy" truck, and that two trucks--not one--were driven to Oklahoma City that afternoon.
Assembly of the bomb was said to have been completed that night at a warehouse in the Oklahoma capitol city with the help of Poindexter, McVeigh, and A.R.A. member Richard Guthrie.
In this far more dramatic version of events, related in Secrets Worth Dying For, Poindexter was killed by a throat slashing administered by an A.R.A. member after bomb assembly was completed.
The explanation given to McVeigh for the killing: "Soldier, he was only hired help, not one of us.")
FBI interviews provide some support for each of the conflicting stories.
The couple who own the Santa Fe Trail Diner in Herington, the site of McVeigh's storage locker, told federal interviewers that they saw McVeigh, Nichols, and a third man who resembled John Doe #2 having breakfast in their establishment around 8 a.m. on the morning before the bombing.
Witnesses also reported seeing a Ryder truck and another pickup truck at Geary Lake an hour or two later.
Owners of a steakhouse in Perry, Oklahoma told agents they saw McVeigh and "a stocky companion" eat dinner in their restaurant around 7 in the evening.
What to make of these various sightings?
We might never know exactly who assisted McVeigh in the 24 hours leading up to the dreadful events of April 19, but the McVeigh-and-McVeigh-alone theory, and the McVeigh-and-just-Nichols theory, both seem to stretch credulity.
For Timothy McVeigh, April 19 stood out as a date with multiple historical meanings.
It was, probably foremost to the former visitor to Waco, the date in 1995 that the federal government launched its attack on the Branch Davidian compound in Texas, with the horrific loss of life that resulted.
McVeigh also knew April 19 to be the date in 1775 that the Battle of Lexington occurred, marking the beginning of the armed uprising by colonialists against British control.
In his getaway car, McVeigh included a bumper sticker that he expected--probably wanted--authorities to find.
The bumper sticker carried the quote of Revolutionary War patriot Samuel Adams, "WHEN THE GOVERNMENT FEARS THE PEOPLE, THERE IS LIBERTY.
WHEN THE PEOPLE FEAR THE GOVERNMENT, THERE IS TYRANNY."
Below the slogan, McVeigh scribbled his own words: "Maybe now, there will be liberty!"
April 19 of 1995, McVeigh also certainly knew, was to be the scheduled day of execution in Arkansas for a white supremacist Richard Snell, formerly of Elohim City, who had--years earlier--targeted the Murrah Building in Oklahoma City as the site for a potential bombing.
On the morning that he would become the greatest mass murderer in American history, McVeigh chose to wear a T-shirt with a drawing of Abraham Lincoln and the words shouted by John Wilkes Booth after his assassination of the president, "SIC SEMPER TYRANNIS" ("thus ever to tyrants").
In the version of events related by McVeigh in his authorized biography, American Terrorist, he began driving south in his Ryder truck from Ponca City about 7 a.m. on the morning of April 19, having made an "executive decision" to move up the scheduled timing of the bombing.
In the more sensational version of events related in Secrets Worth Dying For, McVeigh, with Michael Brescia in the passenger seat of the Ryder truck, left an Oklahoma City warehouse around 8 a.m. At 8:45, McVeigh pulled the truck into an Oklahoma City tire store to ask directions.
According to the store employee who talked with McVeigh, a second man wearing a baseball cap sat in the passenger seat of the vehicle as McVeigh sought directions to a downtown address six blocks away.
A video camera at 8:55 a.m. captured the Ryder truck as it headed toward the center of downtown Oklahoma City.
The Ryder truck drove up NW 5th street shortly before 9:00.
McVeigh lit two fuses.
He parked the truck in the handicapped zone in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, locked the vehicle, and strode quickly away in the direction of a nearby YMCA building.
At 9:02 a.m., shortly after many parents had dropped their toddlers off at the Murrah Building's second-floor daycare center, the bomb exploded, taking with it much of the building, killing 167 people, injuring another 509, and changing forever the lives of thousands of Oklahomans.
(The damage to the building was so extensive that many people believe there were in fact two blasts--the second coming from an ATF secure area where explosives being stored (illegally) were ignited by the truck bomb.
Both seismic evidence and witness testimony supports the "two blast theory.")
Two news stories that followed the bombing reported raised interesting questions concerning a wider conspiracy.
In Arkansas, prison officials reported that in the days preceding April 19, Richard Snell repeatedly told them to expect a big bombing or explosion on the day of his execution.
Execution came for Snell exactly twelve hours after the Oklahoma City bombing.
Meanwhile, in Spokane, Washington, the local paper reported that Chevie Kehoe, a former Elohim City resident staying at a motel in the city, woke early on April 19 to demand that the motel owner turn the lobby television to CNN, telling him that "something is going to happen and it's going to wake people up."
The motel owner said that Kehoe became ecstatic when news of the Oklahoma City bombing was announced.
"It's about time!"
Kehoe is reported to have exclaimed.
About 80 minutes after the bombing, Charles Hanger, an Oklahoma Highway Patrol officer, noticed a McVeigh's Mercury driving north on I-35, about twenty miles from the Kansas border.
The car carried no license plate, so the officer pulled the driver over.
When McVeigh turned out to be carrying a concealed weapon without a permit, in addition to driving without a license or a vehicle registration, he was arrested, booked, and placed in the county jail in Perry, Oklahoma.
Later that day, amidst the gruesome rubble of downtown Oklahoma City, federal agents found the vehicle identification number for the Ryder truck.
Within hours, investigators were in a car headed for Junction City, Kansas, to see who might have rented it.
The Investigation and Trial Preliminaries By April 21, investigatory trails had led to Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols.
Initial speculation that the bombing was the work of Arab extremists faded away.
The lead FBI investigator at Waco, Clinton Van Zandt of the FBI's Behavioral Science Unit, recognized the importance of April 19 and told other agents to look for a "white male...with military experience and ...a member of some militia group...angry for what happened at Ruby Ridge and Waco."
Agents visiting Elliot's Body Shop in Junction City, the shop that rented the Ryder truck, came away with a description of renter "Robert Kling," a/k/a "John Doe No.
1," a white male with a brush cut and a strong nose.
The manager of the Dreamland Motel told them that "John Doe No.
1" looked very much like Timothy McVeigh, who had rented a room at her motel in the days before the bombing.
A former co-worker in New York also told authorities that "John Doe No.
1" might be the man he knew as Timothy McVeigh.
A computer check in Washington came up with information that surprised and delighted investigators: Timothy McVeigh was, at present, sitting in a Noble County, Oklahoma jail on unrelated misdemeanor charges.
Federal agents traveled to Perry, where they picked up McVeigh--who had been wondering all the while what was taking authorities so long--and transported him by helicopter to Tinker Air Force Base, near Oklahoma City.
Before his arraignment that evening, McVeigh met briefly with two court-appointed attorneys.
"Yes," he told them, "I did the bombing."
Once authorities had the name of a suspect, it wasn't difficult to identify McVeigh's army buddy, Terry Nichols, as an additional target of suspicion.
McVeigh had listed the Nichols farm in Michigan as his home address.
Nichols turned himself into authorities in Herington, Kansas, and consented to a search of his home.
Searchers found guns, stolen goods, anti-government books, ammonium nitrate, a receipt for the purchase of the ammonium nitrate, Primadet explosive, a hand-drawn map of downtown Oklahoma City, and a telephone card used by McVeigh to make calls in his hunt for bomb-making materials.
Ultimately, the federal government would bring charges against three men: McVeigh and Nichols for conspiracy to bomb a federal building and for the murder of federal agents, and Michael Fortier for not informing authorities about the bombing and lying to federal agents about his knowledge of the bombing.
Prosecutors never fully explained the decision not to bring charges against others suspected of playing significant roles in the bombing conspiracy, but apparently they simply believed they lacked the compelling evidence necessary to meet the Constitution's high "beyond a reasonable doubt" standard of guilt.
Fortier agreed to assist government prosecutors in return for not facing conspiracy charges, a promise of leniency for his admitted crimes, and the promise that his wife would not be charged.
Grand jury indictments of McVeigh and Nichols came on August 11, 1995, three days after Michael and Lori Fortier presented their testimony in the case.
Fearing a fair trial was not possible in Oklahoma, U. S.
District Judge Richard Matsch moved the trial to Denver.
Judge Matsch also ordered that McVeigh and Nichols be tried separately, with McVeigh's trial to begin first.
After receiving authorization from Attorney General Janet Reno to do so, prosecutors announced that they would seek the death penalty in both cases.
The Trial of Timothy McVeigh Timothy McVeigh never got the trial he wanted.
He tried to convince his attorneys to present a "necessity defense" that might allow him to present evidence of the "crimes" of the federal government that his bombing was meant to prevent.
McVeigh believed that at least some jurors, were they to hear about the government's actions at Ruby Ridge and Waco, would find the bombing justified.
(Given the carnage he caused, McVeigh's hope of sympathetic jurors seems far from realistic.)
More importantly to McVeigh, a political trial might provide him the opportunity to make his case against an overreaching federal government in the larger court of public opinion.
McVeigh's lead lawyer was Stephen Jones, a Republican activist who had taken on other politically charged cases.
Upon his appointment as lead counsel, Jones told reporters, "My role is as old as the Constitution.
Whether I perform professionally will be determined by how I conduct myself, and whether my client is satisfied..." The relationship between McVeigh and his attorney soon became strained, when McVeigh suspected Jones as being the source of a leak reported in the New York Times that McVeigh had confessed.
McVeigh also resented Jones's refusal to push his "necessity defense," a decision made by Jones after research convinced him that McVeigh had no chance of establishing--as he would be required to do to raise the defense--that the federal government put McVeigh in "imminent danger."
Rather than employ a necessity defense, Jones opted for a strategy of trying to poke what holes he could in the prosecution's case, thus raising a question of reasonable doubt.
In addition, Jones believed that McVeigh was taking far more responsibility for the bombing than was justified and that McVeigh, although clearly guilty, was only a player in a large conspiracy.
It fit McVeigh's personality, Jones thought, for him to sacrifice himself for others who shared his anti-government cause.
Jones spent considerable resources investigating McVeigh's possible ties to Arab terrorists and Andreas Strassmeir and his Elohim City associates.
So much so, in fact, that McVeigh took to sarcastically calling his attorney "Sherlock Jones."
"He was investigating me, not defending me," McVeigh complained.
In his book about the McVeigh case, Others Unknown: Timothy McVeigh and the Oklahoma City Bombing Conspiracy, Jones wrote: "It strains belief to suppose that this appalling crime was the work of two men--any two men...Could [this conspiracy] have been designed to protect and shelter everyone involved?
Everyone, that is, except my client..." Jones considered presenting McVeigh as "the designated patsy" in a cleverly designed plot, but his own client opposed the strategy and Judge Matsch, after a hearing, ruled the evidence concerning a larger conspiracy to be too insubstantial to be admissible.
Jury selection in the McVeigh case began on March 31, 1997, a month after the appearance of a national news story reporting that McVeigh told defense investigators that he bombed the Murrah Building at the time of day he did to "increase the body count."
The poorly timed leak probably came when a member of the defense team turned over to the Dallas Morning News a computer disk containing FBI reports, not knowing that the contents of their interview with McVeigh also were on the same disk.
McVeigh became convinced that any chance of landing a sympathetic juror, or receiving sympathetic treatment from the judge, evaporated with the story about his interview.
Over the course of three weeks, a jury of seven men and five women was chosen.
Opening statements began on April 24, in front of a packed courtroom at the Byron C.
Rogers Courthouse and a closed-circuit viewing audience in Oklahoma that included many victims and their families.
Lead prosecutor Joseph Hartzler, a wheelchair-bound multiple sclerosis victim, led with a dramatic opening statement that reminded jurors of the tremendous losses suffered two years earlier: "All the children I mentioned died, and more--dozens and dozens of other men, women, children, cousins, loved ones, grandparents, grandchildren, ordinary Americans going about their business.
And the only reason they died...is they were in a building owned by a government that Timothy McVeigh so hated....And the man who committed this act is sitting in this courtroom behind me.
After he did so, he fled the scene--and he even avoided damaging his eardrums because he had earplugs with him."
Hartzler scornfully attacked McVeigh's attempts to portray himself as a modern-day patriot "like Patrick Henry and Samuel Adams."
Hartzler reminded jurors that "our forefathers didn't fight British women and children; they fought other soldiers."
And, he said, they fought them fair: "They didn't plant bombs, and run away wearing earplugs."
In his opening statement for the defense, Stephen Jones charged that the government conducted a hasty two-week investigation of the actual bombing and then spent the next two years zeroing in on his client.
Critical evidence was ignored, Jones charged, such as the eyewitness testimony of bombing victim Daina Bradley that the person she saw emerge from the Ryder truck by the federal building was black-haired, stocky, and had an olive complexion--"John Doe No.
2," not Timothy McVeigh.
Jones saved his greatest wrath for star prosecution witness Michael Fortier, who he labeled as story-changing, dope-dealing conniver.
Jones concluded his statement by promising jurors that by the end of the trial he would show them that his client was innocent of all charges.
The prosecution presented 137 witnesses.
Some witnesses told of their own heart wrenching losses they suffered that April day.
Michelle Rausch, a former journalism student, told of interviewing McVeigh as he peddled anti-government bumper stickers outside of government barricades near Waco in 1993.
FBI agents described how they traced evidence found in the bombing to McVeigh.
Charles Hanger of the Oklahoma Highway Patrol described his arrest of McVeigh on I-35, while other law enforcement authorities described evidence found in McVeigh's car.
Tim Chambers, the Texas seller of the racing fuel nitromethane, described his dealings with the person he now knew to be McVeigh.
McVeigh showed little emotion during the nearly month-long parade to the stand.
The Fortiers, Michael and Lori, filled in some of the most critical gaps in the prosecution's case.
Lori Fortier admitted to some of her own failings and misdeeds, including drug use, lying to authorities, trafficking in stolen guns, wrapping blasting caps in wrapping paper, and helping McVeigh forge a driver's license.
Nonetheless, she presented convincing evidence of McVeigh's key role in the bombing.
For example, Lori Fortier described the day McVeigh laid about fifteen soup cans out on the floor of her trailer to illustrate the type of bombs he hoped to assemble in his truck.
In his long and rambling cross-examination, Stephen Jones forced Lori to concede that she could have saved 168 lives with a simple phone call, but chose not to, and that she had been promised full immunity by the federal government in exchange for her incriminating testimony.
Michael Fortier proved to be the state's most important witness.
Fortier could take jurors from the Timothy McVeigh he knew immediately after Waco, who at that time had unleashed a torrent of anti-government venom, to the one poised and ready to send a message to that same government in Oklahoma City.
Fortier told jurors how McVeigh, in his living room in October 1994, had provided him with detailed plans to blow up the Murrah Building.
By then, according to Fortier, McVeigh had already chosen the date for his attack to mark the second anniversary of the Waco assault.
One of the most memorable moments of the trial came when Joseph Hartzler asked Fortier, "Did you have any discussion [with Tim McVeigh] about the deaths that such a bomb would cause?"
Fortier replied, "I asked him about that...
I said, 'What about all the people?'
And he explained to me, using the terms from the movie "Star Wars" -- he explained to me that he considered all those people to be as if they were the storm troopers in the movie "Star Wars."
They may be individually innocent; but because they are part of the -- the evil empire, they were -- they were guilty by association."
Fortier also revealed his own reaction, when he first heard the news from Oklahoma City: "Oh my God, he did it."
The most painful testimony for McVeigh probably came from his own sister, Jennifer McVeigh.
Her obvious reluctance to offer testimony that hurt her brother made what she did say all the more damaging.
Jennifer outlined for jurors her brother's evolution from a government critic to a militant poised to take violent action against what he saw as a lawless government.
She revealed that he told her of his experience with explosives, as well as the ominous words that ended one of his last letters to her: "Won't be back forever."
The defense presented 25 witnesses over just a one-week period.
The most effective witness for the defense might have been Dr. Frederic Whitehurst, who provided a damning critique of the FBI's sloppy investigation of the bombing site and its handling of other key evidence Unfortunately for McVeigh, while Whitehurst could show that FBI techniques made contamination of evidence possible, he could not point to any evidence (such as trace evidence of explosives on the shirt McVeigh wore on April 19) that he knew to be contaminated.
The task of the defense team was all but impossible.
They could not come up with a single alibi witness.
They faced the reality that McVeigh had told dozens of people of his hatred of the government, and had told a friend that he planned to take violent action on April 19.
Rental agreements and a drawing of downtown Oklahoma City linked him to the blast.
He carried earplugs in his car driving north from Oklahoma City forty minutes after the explosion.
How could it all be explained away?
In his closing argument, Jones pointed the jury to what the prosecution didn't have, such as an eyewitness that placed him near the Murrah Building around 9:00 a.m. on April 19, or the lack of McVeigh's fingerprints on the ignition key for the Ryder rental truck recovered in the bombing investigation.
The Fortiers' lacked credibility, Jones said, they were just out to save their own skins.
For a sympathetic defendant charged in a less heinous crime, poking holes in a prosecution case can sometimes be enough.
Not in this case, however.
After over twenty-three hours of deliberation, the jury returned its verdict: guilty on all eleven counts.
McVeigh sat expressionless at the defense table as the verdict was read.
The same jury listened to evidence in the penalty phase of the trial, with McVeigh's life hanging in the balance.
Much of the testimony did not make for easy listening.
Stories of heartbreak and loss, told by victims and rescue workers and medical personnel.
Doctors told of sawing off legs of people trapped under the rubble.
Wifes told of husbands who would never see their children graduate or get marries.
Firefighters described recurring nightmares they had experienced since the tragedy.
Police officers described finding dead babies in what was once the second-floor daycare center at the Murrah Building.
In the face of this powerful testimony, testimonials from McVeigh's Army buddies and the argument of Stephen Jones that his client was not motivated by hatred of the victims paled in comparison.
The last two witnesses for the defense probably were its strongest, Timothy's divorced parents, Bill and Mickey McVeigh.
Mickey cried as she read a statement she had composed the previous night.
She told jurors that Tim was "a child any mother could be proud of; I still to this day cannot believe he would have caused this devastation."
Bill McVeigh introduced a fifteen-minute videotape showing his young son meeting Santa Claus, playing with his toy train, and appearing to be a normal, All-American boy.
"I love Tim," Bill McVeigh said simply.
For two days, the jury discussed McVeigh's fate.
On Friday, June 13, 1997, the jury's decision was announced: death.
Two months later, McVeigh returned to Judge Matsch's courtroom to hear the formal pronouncement of his sentence.
Asked by the judge if he had anything to say, McVeigh quoted from a 1928 dissenting opinion by Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis: "'Our government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher.
For good or ill, it teaches the whole people by its example.'
That's all I have."
After Matsch pronounced the sentence of death, McVeigh was escorted from the courtroom by federal marshals, to be readied for transport to Florence, Colorado, the site of a federal prison known as "Supermax."
The Trials of Terry Nichols and Epilogue Six months after McVeigh received his sentence, co-conspirator Terry Nichols escaped a death verdict in his trial before Judge Matsch.
Although found guilty of conspiracy to bomb a federal building and eight counts of involuntary manslaughter, the jury acquitted Nichols on charges of using a weapon of mass destruction and first-degree murder.
The jury apparently agreed with the argument of defense attorney Michael Tigar that Nichols had decided to drop out of the conspiracy some time before the actual bombing.
The fact that Nichols spent April 19, 1995 at home with his family in Kansas probably figured large in the jury's decision.
The jury might also have been swayed by Nichols's show of remorse--he cried at several points during the testimony--, which stood in stark contrast to McVeigh's courtroom demeanor.
(In May 2004, Nichols found his life spared a second time, when a jury deadlocked on his sentence after he had been found guilty in state court in Oklahoma on 160 charges of first-degree murder.)
In a sixteen-page letter written to Judge Matsch prior to the imposition of sentence, Nichols wrote, "If I did anything to contribute to the cause of the Oklahoma City bombing I am sorry, I'm truly sorry."
He implied in his letter that he never believed McVeigh would actually go through with his bombing plan.
On June 4, 1998, Nichols listened as Judge Matsch pronounced his sentence: life in prison without parole.
Authorities delivered Nichols to the same Colorado prison that housed McVeigh and other celebrity inmates including Unabomber Theodore Kacyznski and the mastermind of the first attack in 1993 on New York's World Trade Center, Ramzi Yousef.
(In a letter to the authors of American Terrorist, Kacyznski said he "liked" McVeigh, who he described as "an adventurer by nature" who, at the same time, was "very intelligent" and expressed ideas that "seemed rational and sensible.")
Later in 1998, Michael Fortier joined McVeigh and Nichols at the Supermax.
Fortier plead guilty to lying to federal officials and failing to warn authorities of McVeigh's planned bombing.
He received a twelve-year sentence.
(Fortier was released from prison in January 2006, after serving ten years and six months of his sentence.)
McVeigh's appeals, as expected, met no success.
In September 1999, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed his conviction.
Six months later, the United States Supreme Court refused to hear his appeal.
Authorities moved McVeigh to the only federal death row (there had been no federal executions since 1963) at a penitentiary at Terre Haute, Indiana in July 1999.
The American public got its first chance to hear directly from McVeigh in March 2000, when prison officials allowed Ed Bradley of the CBS show "Sixty Minutes" to interview him.
McVeigh set only one condition for the interview: that Bradley not ask him whether he bombed the Murrah Building.
He still had last-ditch appeals to think about.
In the over thirty-minute interview, McVeigh offered his thoughts about politics, about his service in the Gulf War, and about what he perceived to be his unfair trial.
Still, however, he showed no remorse over what happened in Oklahoma City.
He blamed the U. S. government for teaching, through its aggressive foreign policy and application of the death penalty, the lesson that "violence is an acceptable option."
In January 2001, McVeigh decided to drop all his appeals and expedite his own execution.
Judge Matsch set May 16 as the day he would receive a lethal injection.
However, just six days before the scheduled execution, the Justice Department revealed that it found over 4,000 pages of evidence that should have been turned over to McVeigh's defense attorneys before trial, but wasn't.
Attorney General John Ashcroft announced that McVeigh's execution would be postponed for one month to allow the defense to inspect the newly released documents.
Angered by what he saw as another example of the government's unfairness, McVeigh at first decided to renew his appeals, but after his first appeal was rejected on June 7, McVeigh announced that he was ready to die.
On the evening of June 10, McVeigh had his last meal (two pints of chocolate chip ice cream).
The next morning, he woke early to take a shower.
At 7 a.m., dressed in a shirt, khaki pants and slip-on shoes, McVeigh was led to the execution chamber.
A "restraint team" strapped him to a padded gurney.
The curtains over glass panels separating the chamber from a viewing area parted to allow 30 people to directly watch McVeigh's final moments, while another 300 victims and relatives gathered in Oklahoma City to watch the event on closed-circuit television.
McVeigh made no final statement, but instead left a handwritten copy of the poem "Invictus," with its concluding lines, "I am the master of my fate / I am the captain of my soul."
Warden Harley Lappin read an official statement and then said, "We are ready."
As the drugs entered his veins, McVeigh lifted his head and made eye contact with witnesses in the viewing room.
He was pronounced dead at 7:14 a.m.
Three months after his execution, on September 11, 2001, McVeigh lost his claim to having masterminded the worst terrorist attack in United States history when hijacked airplanes slammed into the two towers of the World Trade Center.

McVeigh Trial Homepage



####
document number 2: 
Signed agreement close in Kumanovo


NATO and Yugoslav delegations resumed talks in Kumanovo on a military-technical agreement for the withdrawal of the Yugoslav army and security forces from Kosovo, Radio Pancevo of Yugoslavia reported.
The media report cited NATO spokesman Trey Cate as saying he expected the agreement to be signed later tonight.
Serb TV in its late-night news program also reported the talks had resumed and that the Yugoslav delegation was headed by the deputy chief- of-staff, Gen.
Svetozar Marjanovic who joined the delegation at the French air base in Kumanovo on Sunday.
Earlier today, Russia and the West agreed on arrangements for a settlement in Kosovo that provides for a large NATO-led security force and the safe return of some 1.3 million ethnic-Albanian refugees.
It remains unclear, however, whether the long-awaited agreement with Moscow will convince Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to abide by NATO's demands for a full withdrawal of his forces from the Serbian province, the return of refugees, the acceptance of the 50,000-strong peacekeeping force and restoration of autonomy to the Serbian province.
U.S. State Department spokesman James Rubin said the agreement was reached after two days of talks in Germany among foreign ministers from the world's seven largest industrialized democracies and Russia.
The breakthrough came after Russian President Boris Yeltsin authorized the language of a U.N. Security Council resolution during a late-night telephone call with Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov.
The U.N. Security Council, having been presented the G8 resolution on Kosovo, has adjourned until Wednesday at the earliest.

Advertisement

This gives nations time to study the measure and consult with their capitals, as required under a 24-hour rule.
China and Russia, however, continue to say they will not approve the resolution until there is a stop in the bombing.
China, which is still angry over NATO's mistaken bombing of its embassy in Belgrade, is the only permanent Security Council member that does not belong to the Group of Eight.
Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, who has been instrumental in brokering a settlement with Belgrade, is in Beijing today lobbying China's support for the U.N. measure.
Rubin predicted 'early adoption'of the resolution by the Security Council.
After months of negotiations with Russia, a traditional ally of its fellow Slavs in the former Yugoslavia, the dispute with Moscow had been narrowed to three issues -- who would command the peacekeeping force, the apprehension of alleged war criminals and the type of measure the Security Council would use to embody its authorization for the settlement.
The measure does not specifically authorize a NATO-led peacekeeping force, they said, but allows 'member states and relevant international organizations to establish the international security presence.'
Both sides said the language of the measure is fuzzy enough for NATO to go ahead with the mission and Russia to claim the troops it might dispatch to Kosovo are not under alliance command.
Although the Kosovo force will not be charged with arresting individuals charged with war crimes, such as Milosevic, NATO wanted the resolution to address the issue.
The resolution will merely refer to the obligation all U.N. member states have to extradite alleged war criminals for trial before panel in The Hague.
In Washington, President Clinton hailed the tentative step toward peace in Kosovo but said the allied bombing will be suspended only when 'there is evidence that full withdrawal has begun' by Belgrade.
However, Clinton sounded a note of caution as the West painstakingly works for a diplomatic end to the conflict with Milosevic.
'We want to see compliance.
And when there is evidence that full withdrawal has begun, we will suspend the bombing and then monitor that for compliance,' Clinton said.
Clinton also spoke with Russian President Boris Yeltsin for a second day in a row, thanking him for the 'constructive role' he played in winning Russian approval of the resolution.
NATO spokesman Jamie Shea also welcomed the news that G8 foreign ministers in Cologne have agreed on a draft U.N. Security Council resolution as a 'breakthrough on the path to peace.'
But he made clear that until there is evidence of Serb-led Yugoslav forces withdrawing, the bombing will go on.
'NATO is looking for practical implementation from Belgrade.
Without that, nothing can go forward,' Shea told reporters.
NATO continued the bombing campaign on Yugoslavia.
In 77th day of the bombing campaign, NATO flew 658 sorties, including 222 strike and 65 air defense suppression missions, hitting military targets in Kosovo including 20 artillery pieces, 10 armored personnel carriers, nine mortar positions, six tanks and eight multiple rocket launchers, according to the alliance.
Meanwhile, the build-up of the KFOR forces in Macedonia continues.
There are now about 16,500 troops pre-deployed there waiting for the international peace operation to begin; about 1,000 soldiers have arrived over the last 24 hours, including elements of the 1st Parachute Battalion and the 3rd Division of the British Armed Forces, and further British and French forces are expected to arrive today, according to NATO.
Shea explained some of the plans for the force.
There will be five zones and a single commander, to have a genuine unity of command in the structure, a precondition to an effective operation.
Approximately 3,600 Marines and Army soldiers will make up the initial peacekeeping force in the U.S.-controlled sector of Kosovo, drawing its members from both the 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit and the Army's Task Force Hawk in Albania, says Pentagon spokesman Ken Bacon.
Included in the peace force will be eight Apache attack helicopters, along with two light infantry companies, an anti-tank company, and a mechanized artillery company, Bacon said today.
The 26th MEU is now in the Aegean awaiting the order to move into Kosovo as the leading edge of an 'enabling force.'
Of the 2,200 Marines in the MEU, 1,900 will go to Kosovo, joined by 1,700 members of Task Force Hawk.
The troops will move from a staging area north of Skopje, Macedonia, to Gnjilane in southeastern Kosovo to set up an American headquarters.
They will travel primarily over land, most likely on the heels of a British peacekeeping force that will operate out of Pristina, the capital of the province.
They will ultimately be replaced by about 7,000 Army soldiers who will comprise the standard peace force for the U.S. sector.
---

Advertisement

Advertisement

Copyright 1999 by United Press International.
All rights reserved.
---

Glitches delay start of Florida recount for senator, governor


CPI Aero signs contract with Sikorsky Black Hawk fuel assemblies


Russian dance troupe under investigation after twerking performance goes viral


Calvin Harris forbids Taylor Swift from writing about him


Emilia Clarke on why she turned down 'Fifty Shades' role


Lithuania brings back military conscription



####
document number 3: 
Homemade, Cheap and Dangerous


Terror Cells Favor Simple Ingredients In Building Bombs

By Craig Whitlock Washington Post Foreign Service

LONDON, July 4 -- The 39-page memo recovered from an al-Qaeda laptop computer in Pakistan three years ago read like an Idiot's Guide to Bombmaking.
Forget military explosives or fancy detonators, it lectured.
Instead, the manual advised a shopping trip to a hardware store or pharmacy, where all the necessary ingredients for a terrorist attack are stocked on the shelves.

"Make use of that which is available at your disposal and . .
.
bend it to suit your needs, (improvise) rather than waste valuable time becoming despondent over that which is not within your reach," counseled the author of the memo, Dhiren Barot, a British citizen who said he developed his keep-it-simple philosophy by "observing senior planners" at al-Qaeda training camps.

Barot, who was later captured near London and is serving a 30-year sentence, had envisioned an attack with multiple car bombs that would detonate liquid-gas cylinders encased in rusty nails -- a strategy with striking similarities to an attempt last week by a suspected terrorist cell to blow up three vehicles in London and Glasgow, Scotland.

Counterterrorism officials have warned for years that Osama bin Laden and his lieutenants have tried to obtain weapons of mass destruction, such as a nuclear device or chemical or biological weapons.
In response, U.S. military and intelligence agencies have invested vast amounts of money to block their acquisition.

So far, however, al-Qaeda and its affiliates have relied almost solely on simple, homemade bombs crafted from everyday ingredients -- such as nail-polish remover and fertilizer -- when plotting attacks in Europe and the United States.

The makeshift bombs lack the destructive potential of the conventional explosives that rake Iraq on a daily basis.
They are also less reliable, as demonstrated by the car bombs that failed to go off in London last week after the culprits tried to ignite them with detonators wired to cellphones.

But other attempts have generated plenty of mayhem and damage, including the kitchen-built backpack bombs that killed 52 people in the London public transit system on July 7, 2005.

"It makes no difference to your average person if somebody puts a car bomb out there that is crude or one that is sophisticated," said Chris Driver-Williams, a retired British major and military intelligence officer who studies explosive devices used by terrorist groups.
"If it detonates, all of a sudden you've got a very serious device and one that has achieved exactly what the terrorists wanted."

The advantages of homemade explosives are that they are easy and cheap to manufacture, as well as difficult for law enforcement agencies to detect.
According to one expert, the peroxide-based liquid explosives that an al-Qaeda cell allegedly intended to use to blow up nine transatlantic airliners last summer would have cost as little as $15 a bomb.

It is technically simple to make such explosives.
Instructions are widely available on the Internet.
Experts added, however, that it takes skill and sophistication to construct a viable bomb by adding timing devices, detonators or secondary charges.

Investigations have found evidence that most al-Qaeda cells involved in bombing plots in Europe have received training in camps in Pakistan or Afghanistan, or were tutored by graduates of those camps.

Among them: cell members involved in the July 7, 2005, bombings in Britain and a separate plot two weeks later that also targeted the London subway.
The suspected ringleaders of the May 16, 2003, bombings in Casablanca were also al-Qaeda camp veterans who had experimented in explosives.
Richard Reid, who tried to blow up an American Airlines flight from Paris to Miami in 2001, was taught how to build his shoe bomb in Afghanistan.

Stephen Swain, former head of the international counterterrorism unit at Scotland Yard in London, said the culprits in each case had been trained by seasoned al-Qaeda operatives "without a shadow of a doubt."

"It's a common thread throughout the entire theater of al-Qaeda-style operations," said Swain, who retired last year and is a senior consultant for Control Risks Group, an international security firm.
"There's quite a lot of training going on in this regard."

Simple Recipes

Terrorist groups have been using homemade explosives for years.
In February 1993, Islamic radicals drove a truck loaded with about 1,500 pounds of urea nitrate -- a fertilizer-based explosive -- and hydrogen-gas cylinders into a garage underneath the World Trade Center.

The bomb killed six people and injured more than 1,000.
Investigators determined that the cell built the bomb in New Jersey by consulting manuals brought from Pakistan.
Two years later, the ringleader of the plot, Ramzi Yousef, tried but failed to use homemade liquid explosives to down 11 airliners crossing the Pacific Ocean.

The same year, Timothy J.
McVeigh blew up the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City with a truck bomb consisting of 5,000 pounds of fuel oil and fertilizer, killing 168 people.

Since then, it has become more difficult to purchase large quantities of fertilizer without attracting attention; sellers in the United States and many European countries are supposed to notify authorities of suspicious customers.

The last known attempt by al-Qaeda to construct a fertilizer-based bomb in Europe came in 2003, when a cell operative bought 1,200 pounds of bagged Kemira GrowHow fertilizer for about $200 from an agricultural supply store in Britain.
The salesman, John Stone, later testified that he thought the transaction was strange because it was the wrong time of year to apply the substance and the buyer claimed to have only a small garden plot.

"I hope you're not going around bombing anything," Stone said he told the buyer half-jokingly, although the salesclerk did not notify police.

British authorities were tipped off soon after, however, by an employee at a rental-storage center where the cell was keeping the fertilizer.
In April, five members of the group were convicted in the plot, known as Operation Crevice.
Many European fertilizer manufacturers have since reduced the amount of ammonium nitrate, a key bomb ingredient, in their products.

Partly as a result, European and U.S. counterterrorism officials said terrorist cells are increasingly turning to peroxide-based explosives, which can be made in much smaller quantities from materials available at drugstores.

The most commonly used compound is triacetone triperoxide, or TATP.
Primary ingredients for a homemade batch typically include acetone, which can be found in nail-polish remover, and hydrogen peroxide, a chemical used in hair-bleaching products.

TATP wields about 85 percent of the explosive power of TNT and can be made in a kitchen or bathroom.
A dime-size amount of the explosive can ignite a fireball the size of a basketball.

'Nobody Ever Stops Me'

The risky side of TATP is that it is highly unstable.
A spark or light friction can detonate the explosive, making it extraordinarily difficult to handle.
Experts and police said there have been numerous cases in which suspected terrorists -- as well as foolhardy amateur chemists -- have set off accidental explosions, resulting in death or severe injuries.

"You need to concentrate the chemicals," said Hans J. Michels, a professor of chemical engineering at Imperial College in London.
"It's a filthy job and it's dangerous, but it can be done."

Despite the dangers, al-Qaeda cells have used peroxide-based explosives in more than a dozen plots in the past decade, including the July 7 and 21, 2005, London incidents, as well as attacks in Casablanca, Istanbul and the Indonesian island of Bali, according to counterterrorism officials.
Danish police also discovered TATP in September during the arrest of seven terrorism suspects in Odense.

In crystalline form, TATP looks like powdered sugar and is difficult to detect in airports; security officials need to examine an exposed surface with a swab kit or other tester to determine its presence.

"TATP and peroxide-based explosives are concern number one for the aviation industry," said Ehud Keinan, a chemistry professor at Technion-Israel Institute of Technology and a leading researcher on the substance.
"It will take some time before we are protected.
Right now, we are not."

Reached by telephone in Paris, where he was scheduled to give a lecture about TATP on Wednesday at an international conference, Keinan said he often carries a small sample of the volatile compound in his carry-on luggage when he flies -- just to test airport security.
"Nobody ever stops me," he said.

When asked if it might be dangerous to sit next to him on a plane, he said, "If you know how to take care of it, it's okay.
If you don't know what you're doing, you're in trouble."

U.S. Homeland Security officials have said terrorism suspects arrested last August in Britain on charges that they were plotting to blow up several transatlantic airliners might have been planning to smuggle on board TATP or a related compound, HMTD, hexamethylene triperoxide diamine.
Experts said it would take as little as one or two quarts of those explosives to down a large plane.

TATP was discovered in the late 19th century but was deemed to have no industrial or commercial applications because it was so unstable.
Researchers generally ignored the substance until 1980, when Palestinian fighters used it for the first time in a bomb in Israel.

Palestinian bombers have used it ever since.
TATP was used for the first time in an attack in Europe in July 1994, when Palestinians exploded a car bomb outside the Israeli Embassy in London.

U.S. and European counterterrorism investigators paid limited attention to the explosive until the July 2005 bombings in London.
Afterward, the New York City Police Department built an exact replica of the apartment in Leeds, England, that the July 7 conspirators allegedly used to manufacture their backpack bombs.

Hugh O'Rourke, deputy inspector of the NYPD counterterrorism division, said the police department wanted to show beat officers what a kitchen-counter TATP production line would look like.
He said it is easy to mistake the white powder and its cooking tools -- such as pool cleaners, large tubs or commercial-size fans -- for a common drug lab.

"Patrol cops see a lot of white powder, think it's crack, and want to touch it and package it," which could easily result in an explosion, he said.
"We don't want them doing that."



####
document number 4: 
7/27/96: Olympic Park Bombing



A pipe bomb explosion kills two people at Olympic Centennial Park in Atlanta.




####
document number 5: 
NATO bombs Yugoslavia


On March 24, 1999, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) commences air strikes against Yugoslavia with the bombing of Serbian military positions in the Yugoslav province of Kosovo.
The NATO offensive came in response to a new wave of ethnic cleansing launched by Serbian forces against the Kosovar Albanians on March 20.

The Kosovo region lay at the heart of the Serbian empire in the late Middle Ages but was lost to the Ottoman Turks in 1389 following Serbia’s defeat in the Battle of Kosovo.
By the time Serbia regained control of Kosovo from Turkey in 1913, there were few Serbs left in a region that had come to be dominated by ethnic Albanians.
In 1918, Kosovo formally became a province of Serbia, and it continued as such after communist leader Josip Broz Tito established the Federal People’s Republic of Yugoslavia in 1945, comprising the Balkan states of Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, Slovenia and Macedonia.
However, Tito eventually gave in to Kosovar demands for greater autonomy, and after 1974 Kosovo existed as independent state in all but name.

Serbs came to resent Kosovo’s autonomy, which allowed it to act against Serbian interests, and in 1987 Slobodan Milosevic was elected leader of Serbia’s Communist Party with a promise of restoring Serbian rule to Kosovo.
In 1989, Milosevic became president of Serbia and moved quickly to suppress Kosovo, stripping its autonomy and in 1990 sending troops to disband its government.
Meanwhile, Serbian nationalism led to the dissolution of the Yugoslav federation in 1991, and in 1992 the Balkan crisis deteriorated into civil war.
A new Yugoslav state, consisting only of Serbia and the small state of Montenegro, was created, and Kosovo began four years of nonviolent resistance to Serbian rule.

The militant Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) emerged in 1996 and began attacking Serbian police in Kosovo.
With arms obtained in Albania, the KLA stepped up its attacks in 1997, prompting a major offensive by Serbian troops against the rebel-held Drenica region in February-March 1998.
Dozens of civilians were killed, and enlistment in the KLA increased dramatically.
In July, the KLA launched an offensive across Kosovo, seizing control of nearly half the province before being routed in a Serbian counteroffensive later that summer.
The Serbian troops drove thousands of ethnic Albanians from their homes and were accused of massacring Kosovo civilians.

In October, NATO threatened Serbia with air strikes, and Milosevic agreed to allow the return of tens of thousands of refugees.
Fighting soon resumed, however, and talks between Kosovar Albanians and Serbs in Rambouillet, France, in February 1999 ended in failure.
On March 18, further peace talks in Paris collapsed after the Serbian delegation refused to sign a deal calling for Kosovo autonomy and the deployment of NATO troops to enforce the agreement.
Two days later, the Serbian army launched a new offensive in Kosovo.
On March 24, NATO air strikes began.

In addition to Serbian military positions, the NATO air campaign targeted Serbian government buildings and the country’s infrastructure in an effort to destabilize the Milosevic regime.
The bombing and continued Serbian offensives drove hundreds of thousands of Kosovar Albanians into neighboring Albania, Macedonia, and Montenegro.
Many of these refugees were airlifted to safety in the United States and other NATO nations.
On June 10, the NATO bombardment ended when Serbia agreed to a peace agreement calling for the withdrawal of Serb forces from Kosovo and their replacement by NATO peacekeeping troops.

With the exception of two U.S. pilots killed in a training mission in Albania, no NATO personnel lost their lives in the 78-day operation.
There were some mishaps, however, such as miscalculated bombings that led to the deaths of Kosovar Albanian refugees, KLA members, and Serbian civilians.
The most controversial incident was the May 7 bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade, which killed three Chinese journalists and caused a diplomatic crisis in U.S.-Chinese relations.

On June 12, NATO forces moved into Kosovo from Macedonia.
The same day, Russian troops arrived in the Kosovo capital of Pristina and forced NATO into agreeing to a joint occupation.
Despite the presence of peacekeeping troops, the returning Kosovar Albanians retaliated against Kosovo’s Serbian minority, forcing them to flee into Serbia.
Under the NATO occupation, Kosovar autonomy was restored, but the province remained officially part of Serbia.

Slobodan Milosevic was ousted from power by a popular revolution in Belgrade in October 2000.
He was replaced by the popularly elected Vojislav Kostunica, a moderate Serbian nationalist who promised to reintegrate Serbia into Europe and the world after a decade of isolation.

Slobodan Milosevic died in prison in the Netherlands on March 11, 2006, during his trial for crimes against humanity and genocide.
Due to his death, the court returned no verdict.



####
document number 6: 
New York area bombing suspect arrested


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


US authorities arrested Ahmad Khan Rahami on Monday in connection with weekend bombings in New York and New Jersey.
The FT's Gregory Meyer reports from Elizabeth, New Jersey.
Clips courtesy of Reuters.
For information regarding your data privacy, visit acast.com/privacy

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Financial Times, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 7: 
Israeli army launches fresh air raids on Gaza, targets Hamas


A young Palestinian stands amid the crater of a destroyed house following overnight Israeli missile attacks on Thursday east of Khan Younis [Adel Hana/AP Photo]


Israel has said it carried out fresh air raids on the Gaza Strip in response to rocket fire from the besieged enclave, two days after a precarious ceasefire went into force following a round of fighting that killed dozens of Palestinians.

The Israeli army said its attacks early on Saturday did not target positions of the Islamic Jihad group but sites belonging to Hamas, which administers the Gaza Strip.
There was no immediate comment by Hamas.

More:

The air raids marked the first time Hamas was targeted since this week's escalation began early on Tuesday with Israel's targeted assassination of Bahaa Abu al-Ata, a top commander of Islamic Jihad, the enclave's second-most powerful group after Hamas.

That 42-year-old's killing in a raid targeting his house triggered retaliatory rocket fire from Islamic Jihad at Israel.

After two days of violence, in which 34 Palestinians died but no Israeli fatalities, a ceasefire was agreed.
Fire from both sides was reported on Saturday.

In a statement on Saturday, the Israeli army said it was attacking Hamas targets after "two rockets were fired from the Gaza Strip towards Israeli territory" and were intercepted by air defences.

Palestinian security sources told the AFP news agency the Israeli attacks were aimed at two Hamas sites in the north of the territory, where two million Palestinians live under a blockade imposed by Israel and Egypt for more than 10 years.

Al Jazeera's Harry Fawcett, reporting from Gaza City, said the targeting of sites belonging to Hamas marked a change in Israel's strategy in this latest round of fighting.

"Hamas, while supporting Islamic Jihad verbally and making statements of solidarity, had not joined in the rocket fire itself," he said.

"Perhaps this is an indication that Israel believes that this latest round of rocket did come from Hamas, so we will wait to see what the implications of that will be on the ceasefire going forward."

Probe into civilian killings


Israel's military on Friday said it would investigate "harm caused to civilians" from air raids it carried out that killed eight members of one family, including five children.

The bombing in the early hours of Thursday in Deir al-Balah struck the home of Rasmi Abu Malhous, a member of Islamic Jihad, and his brother Mohamed, a Palestinian Authority (PA) employee.

The air raids killed Rasmi, his second wife Maryam, 45, and three of his 11 children - Salim, 3, Mohannad, 12, and three-month-old Firas.
The bombing also killed Mohamed's wife Yousra, 39, and two of their sons, Moaaz, 7, and Waseem, 13.

An Israeli military spokeswoman said on Friday that Israeli forces had hit what she described as an "Islamic Jihad military infrastructure" in the central Gaza town.

"According to the information available to the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] at the time of the strike, no civilians were expected to be harmed as a result of the strike," she said.

She added: "The IDF is investigating the harm caused to civilians by the strike."



####
document number 8: 
DOJ Unseals Criminal Complaint Against Ahmad Khan Rahami


STEVE INSKEEP, HOST:

We know more this morning about the planning and inspiration of attacks on New York and New Jersey.
The Justice Department unsealed a criminal complaint against Ahmad Khan Rahami last night.

And NPR counterterrorism correspondent Dina Temple-Raston has been reading as well as talking with her sources.
Good morning, Dina.

DINA TEMPLE-RASTON, BYLINE: Good morning.

INSKEEP: What evidence do the prosecutors say they have?

TEMPLE-RASTON: Well, the most striking thing that they have is they have a video.
The criminal complaint says that two days before the Manhattan bombing in Chelsea, Rahami recorded a video of himself setting off an explosive device in the backyard of his house in Elizabeth, N.J.

And apparently after he lit the fuse, the complaint says, the video shows there's billowing smoke.
You can hear laughter.
And then Rahami comes into the camera frame and picks up the device.

INSKEEP: Whoa, whoa, whoa, wait a minute.
So he set a fuse for some kind of explosion in his backyard, and then the device didn't go off?
That's what the video shows?

TEMPLE-RASTON: No.
Well, there's billow - what we know is there's billowing smoke, and there's laughter.
So one assumes actually that something did go off.

INSKEEP: OK.
Well, it's still kind of baffling, like, if you actually had a device that worked, you'd have an explosion in your backyard.
He didn't seem to be worried about that?

TEMPLE-RASTON: Apparently not, no.

INSKEEP: OK.
All right.
We haven't actually seen the video, but this is the description.
Now, how did he allegedly gather the bomb-making materials for these attacks?

TEMPLE-RASTON: Well, the criminal complaint says he had an Ebay account.
And allegedly he started buying these materials to make explosive devices back in June.
He - his user name on the account was Ahmad Rahami, so his real name.

INSKEEP: OK.

TEMPLE-RASTON: So there wasn't a lot of operational security here.
And he allegedly bought citric acid, which is a precursor chemical for explosives.
He bought circuit boards and igniters for fireworks.
He bought ball bearings.
And these were the precise components, the complaint alleges, that were later found in the explosive devices discovered in New York and New Jersey.
And this...

INSKEEP: And a quick reminder that all these things are just ordinary items that people could buy for perfectly reasonable uses.
But they can also be used to assemble an explosive device.

TEMPLE-RASTON: Exactly.
And he also bought cellphones, which were used as timers in the devices.
And the complaint says that these were all bought at one store in New Jersey.

And in the complaint, it says all these things were shipped to a New Jersey business called Perth Amboy, which is where Rahami worked, the complaint says, until about September 12.

INSKEEP: What do authorities believe the suspect's inspiration was?

TEMPLE-RASTON: Well, they believe his inspiration had something to do with Islamic terrorism.
He had a journal when he was arrested on Monday morning.
And that diary described in the criminal complaint was rambling.
And he talks about Osama bin Laden and the Boston Marathon bombers.

And, in fact, what he wrote sounds a lot like what the youngest Boston Marathon bomber, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, wrote inside that boat in Boston when they captured him several years ago.

He basically said that the U.S. was killing mujahedeen in Syria and in Iraq and in Afghanistan and that because he couldn't travel somewhere, he felt he needed to do something here.

We don't know if there's any connection to a particular terrorist group.
But clearly his inspiration was along those lines.

INSKEEP: You saw similarities in the actual explosive devices to the Boston Marathon bombing.
And now you're seeing similarities in the motivations?

TEMPLE-RASTON: That's exactly right.

INSKEEP: OK, Dina, thanks very much.

TEMPLE-RASTON: You're welcome.

INSKEEP: That's NPR counterterrorism correspondent Dina Temple-Raston this morning.
Transcript provided by NPR, Copyright NPR.



####
document number 9: 
The Invasion of Poland in pictures, 1939


View of an undamaged Polish city from the cockpit of a German medium bomber aircraft, likely a Heinkel He 111 P, in 1939.


On September 1, 1939, the world was shocked as Nazi troops invaded Poland.
Tensions soared in Europe, and world leaders recognized that this invasion could be the final straw that would lead to war.
German military leaders had begun planning for war with Poland as early as the mid 1920s.
Recovering the ethnically Polish territory of Pomerania, Poznan, and Silesia, as well as the largely German Free City of Danzig were the major objectives.
Nevertheless, the restrictions of Versailles and Germany’s internal weakness made such plans impossible to realize.

Hitler’s rise to power in 1933 capitalized on German’s desire to regain lost territories, to which Nazi leaders added the goal of destroying an independent Poland.
According to author Alexander Rossino, prior to the war Hitler was at least as anti-Polish as anti-Semitic in his opinions.

After Hitler violated the Munich treaty, Poland was able to extract guarantees of military assistance from France, and significantly, Britain.
In March 1939, Hitler began to make demands on Poland for the return of territory in the Polish Corridor, cessation of Polish rights in Danzig, and annexation of the Free City to Germany.
These Poland categorically rejected.
The war was close.

In 1939, the Polish army still maintained many cavalry squadrons, which had served them well as recently as the Polish-Soviet War in 1921.
A myth emerged about the Polish cavalry leading desperate charges against the tanks of the invading Nazis, pitting horsemen against armored vehicles.
While cavalry units did encounter armored divisions on occasion, their targets were ground infantry, and their charges were often effective.
Nazi and Soviet propaganda helped fuel the myth of the noble-yet-backward Polish cavalry.
This photo is of a Polish cavalry squadron on maneuvers somewhere in Poland, on April 29, 1939.


On paper, Poland’s full mobilized army would have numbered about 2.5 million.
Due to allied pressure and mismanagement, however, only about 600,000 Polish troops were in place to meet the German invasion on September 1, 1939.
These forces were organized into 7 armies and 5 independent operational groups.
The typical Polish infantry division was roughly equal in numbers to its German counterpart, but weaker in terms of anti-tank guns, artillery support, and transport.
Poland had 30 active and 7 reserve divisions.
In addition there were 12 cavalry brigades and one mechanized cavalry brigade.

The Germans were organized in two Army Groups, with a total of 5 armies.
The Germans fielded about 1.8 million troops.
The Germans had 2600 tanks against the Polish 180, and over 2,000 aircraft against the Polish 420.
German forces were supplemented by a Slovak brigade.

German forces invaded Poland from the north, south, and west the morning after the Gleiwitz incident.
Slovak forces advanced alongside the Germans in northern Slovakia.
As the Wehrmacht advanced, Polish forces withdrew from their forward bases of operation close to the Polish–German border to more established lines of defence to the east.
After the mid-September Polish defeat in the Battle of the Bzura, the Germans gained an undisputed advantage.
Polish forces then withdrew to the southeast where they prepared for a long defence of the Romanian Bridgehead and awaited expected support and relief from France and the United Kingdom.
While those two countries had pacts with Poland and had declared war on Germany on 3 September, in the end their aid to Poland was very limited.

The Soviet Red Army’s invasion of Eastern Poland on 17 September, in accordance with a secret protocol of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, rendered the Polish plan of defence obsolete.
Facing a second front, the Polish government concluded the defence of the Romanian Bridgehead was no longer feasible and ordered an emergency evacuation of all troops to neutral Romania.
On 6 October, following the Polish defeat at the Battle of Kock, German and Soviet forces gained full control over Poland.
The success of the invasion marked the end of the Second Polish Republic, though Poland never formally surrendered.

Associated Press correspondent Alvin Steinkopf broadcasting from the Free City of Danzig — at the time, a semi-autonomous city-state tied to Poland.
Steinkopf was relating the tense situation in Danzig back to America, on July 11, 1939.
Germany had been demanding the incorporation of Danzing into the Third Reich for months, and appeared to be preparing military action.


The American journalist John Gunther wrote in December 1939 that "the German campaign was a masterpiece.
Nothing quite like it has been seen in military history".
Despite Poland’s poor leadership and outside assistance, Gunther still claimed that the invasion proved the skill of the German armed forces.
The country was divided between Germany and the Soviet Union.
Slovakia gained back those territories taken by Poland in autumn 1938.
Lithuania received the city of Vilnius and its environs on 28 October 1939 from the Soviet Union.

About 65,000 Polish troops were killed in the fighting, with 420,000 others being captured by the Germans and 240,000 more by the Soviets (for a total of 660,000 prisoners).
Up to 120,000 Polish troops escaped to neutral Romania(through the Romanian Bridgehead and Hungary), and another 20,000 to Latvia and Lithuania, with the majority eventually making their way to France or Britain.
Most of the Polish Navy succeeded in evacuating to Britain as well.
German personnel losses were less than their enemies (c.
16,000 killed).

Soviet premier Josef Stalin (second from right), smiles while Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov (seated), signs the non-aggression pact with German Reich Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop (third from right), in Moscow, on August 23, 1939.
The man at left is Soviet Deputy Defense Minister and Chief of the General Staff, Marshal Boris Shaposhnikov.
The nonaggression pact included a secret protocol dividing eastern Europe into spheres of influence in the event of a conflict.
The pact now guaranteed that Hitler’s troops would face no resistance from the Soviets if they invaded Poland, bringing the war one step closer to reality.


Two days after Germany signed the non-aggression pact with the USSR, Great Britain entered into a military alliance with Poland, on August 25, 1939.
This photo shows the scene one week later, on September 1, 1939, one of the first military operations of Germany’s invasion of Poland, and the beginning of World War II.
Here, the German battleship Schleswig-Holstein is bombing a Polish military transit depot at Westerplatte in the Free City of Danzig.
Simultaneously, the German Air Force (Luftwaffe), and ground troops (Heer) were attacking several other Polish targets.


German soldiers comb the Westerplatte after it was surrendered to German units from the Schleswig-Holstein landing crew, on September 7, 1939.
Fewer than 200 Polish soldiers defended the small peninsula, holding off the Germans for seven days.


Aerial view of bombs exploding during a German bombing run over Poland in September of 1939.


Two tanks of the SS-Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler Division cross the Bzura River during the German invasion of Poland in September of 1939.
The Battle of Bzura, the largest of the entire campaign, lasted more than a week, ending with the German forces capturing most of western Poland.


Soldiers of the SS-Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler Division, resting in a ditch alongside a road on the way to Pabianice, during the invasion of Poland in 1939.


German advance guards and scouts are shown in a Polish town that has been under fire during the Nazi invasion of Poland, September 1939.


German infantry cautiously advance on the outskirts of Warsaw, Poland on September 16, 1939.


Several civilian prisoners of war, with arms raised, walk along a road during the German invasion of Poland in September of 1939.


Britain’s King George VI broadcasts to the British nation on the first evening of the war, on September 3, 1939, in London.


A crowd reads newspaper headlines, "Bombs Rain On Warsaw" as they stand outside the U.S. State Department building where diplomats held a conference on war conditions in Europe, on September 1, 1939.


The scene of devastation seen on Ordynacka Street in Warsaw, Poland on March 6, 1940.
The carcass of a dead horse lies in the street among enormous piles of debris.
While Warsaw was under nearly constant bombardment during the invasion, on one day alone, September 25, 1939, about 1,150 bombing sorties were flown by German aircraft against Warsaw, dropping over 550 tons of high explosive and incendiary bombs on the city.


A damaged Polish armored train carrying tanks captured by the 14th SS-Leibstandard Adolf Hitler Division, near Blonie, during the invasion of Poland in September of 1939.


German soldiers, taken prisoner by the Polish army during the Nazi invasion, are shown while they were held captive in Warsaw, on October 2, 1939.


A young Polish boy returns to what was his home and squats among the ruins during a pause in the German air raids on Warsaw, Poland, in September of 1939.
German attacks lasted until Warsaw surrendered on September 28.
One week later, the last of the Polish forces capitulated near Lublin, giving full control of Poland to Germany and the Soviet Union.


Adolf Hitler salutes parading troops of the German Wehrmacht in Warsaw, Poland, on October 5, 1939 after the German invasion.
Behind Hitler are, from left to right: Colonel General Walther von Brauchitsch, Lieutenant General Friedrich von Cochenhausen, Colonel General Gerd von Rundstedt, and Colonel General Wilhelm Keitel.

(Photo credit: Bundesarchiv / AP).



####
document number 10: 
U.S.-led attack on Afghanistan begins


On October 7, 2001, a U.S.-led coalition begins attacks on Taliban-controlled Afghanistan with an intense bombing campaign by American and British forces.
Logistical support was provided by other nations including France, Germany, Australia and Canada and, later, troops were provided by the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance rebels.
The invasion of Afghanistan was the opening salvo in the United States "war on terrorism" and a response to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, D.C.

Dubbed "Operation Enduring Freedom" in U.S. military parlance, the invasion of Afghanistan was intended to target terrorist mastermind Osama bin Laden’s al-Qaida organization, which was based in the country, as well as the extreme fundamentalist Taliban government that had ruled most of the country since 1996 and supported and protected al-Qaida.
The Taliban, which had imposed its extremist version of Islam on the entire country, also perpetrated countless human rights abuses against its people, especially women, girls and ethnic Hazaras.
During their rule, large numbers of Afghans lived in utter poverty, and as many as 4 million Afghans are thought to have suffered from starvation.

In the weeks prior to the invasion, both the United States and the U.N. Security Council had demanded that the Taliban turn over Osama bin Laden for prosecution.
After deeming the Taliban’s counteroffers unsatisfactory—among them to try bin Laden in an Islamic court—the invasion began with an aerial bombardment of Taliban and al-Qaida installations in Kabul, Kandahar, Jalalabad, Konduz and Mazar-e-Sharif.
Other coalition planes flew in airdrops of humanitarian supplies for Afghan civilians.
The Taliban called the actions "an attack on Islam."
In a taped statement released to the Arabic al-Jazeera television network, Osama bin Laden called for a war against the entire non-Muslim world.

After the air campaign softened Taliban defenses, the coalition began a ground invasion, with Northern Alliance forces providing most of the troops and the U.S. and other nations giving air and ground support.
On November 12, a little over a month after the military action began, Taliban officials and their forces retreated from the capital of Kabul.
By early December, Kandahar, the last Taliban stronghold, had fallen and Taliban leader Mullah Mohammed Omar went into hiding rather than surrender.
Al-Qaida fighters continued to hide out in Afghanistan’s mountainous Tora Bora region, where they were engaged by anti-Taliban Afghan forces, backed by U.S. Special Forces troops.
Al-Qaida soon initiated a truce, which is now believed to have been a ploy to allow Osama bin Laden and other key al-Qaida members time to escape into neighboring Pakistan.
By mid-December, the bunker and cave complex used by al-Qaida at Tora Bora had been captured, but there was no sign of bin Laden.

After Tora Bora, a grand council of Afghan tribal leaders and former exiles was convened under the leadership of Hamid Karzai, who first served as interim leader before becoming the first democratically elected president of Afghanistan on December 7, 2004.
Even as Afghanistan began to take the first steps toward democracy, however, with more than 10,000 U.S. troops in country, al-Qaida and Taliban forces began to regroup in the mountainous border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
They continue to engage U.S. and Afghan troops in guerilla-style warfare and have also been responsible for the deaths of elected government officials and aid workers and the kidnapping of foreigners.
Hundreds of American and coalition soldiers and thousands of Afghans have been killed and wounded in the fighting.

Afghans continue to make up the largest refugee population in the world, though nearly 3 million have returned to Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban, further straining the country’s war-ravaged economy.



####
document number 11: 
Help!!
So confused!!
Car rental in Sicily


For our trip in December 2012/January 2013 (not a super busy time on the roads in Sicily, although I suspect travel numbers were increased somewhat because it was Christmastime), we rented from Europcar at the Palermo Airport.
Although airport and train station car rental offices pass on the extra charges associated with those facilities, it was more convenient for us as we'd just gotten off the plane, and were heading west, not into Palermo.
Do you ant a car before you get to Cefalu?
That might influence your decision on when and where to rent.
By the way, the rest of the passengers on our plane seemed to be Germans, and they all marched straight to the Sixt car rental desk at the airport, so you might want to compare prices on both Europcar Sixt with those of Hertz/AAA.

We opted to waive all optional insurance coverage they offered, having checked on the coverage provided by our VISA card, as well as VISA's paperwork requirements.
Had there been any damage, it would likely have involved a major paperwork nightmare, in addition to major inconvenience, but we saved on paying major fees for their coverage.
I think they also ran our card as a "damage deposit," but didn't actually ring up a charge, just had the card on file as security.

Driving was a little challenging in hilltowns with super-narrow streets and tight parking spaces (rent the smallest vehicle you can get that will accommodate all your passengers and luggage), but highway driving in Sicily was a breeze.

Our only near-incident was near Sorrento, after we'd taken the car to mainland Italy by ferry a few days earlier, when a speeding kid passed another car in an intersection in a quiet residential area, just as we were pulling out to make a right turn.
The kid, coming from our right, would've hit us head-on if I hadn't screamed when I saw the car and Scott hadn't slammed on the brakes (he was looking left, having already looked right, before the kid pulled his stunt).
If there had been a collision, there might have been serious medical issues, in addition to automotive, police, and insurance issues.
Thankfully, after giving the kid a honk as he sped thru the small intersection, that was the end of the situation (after our hearts stopped pounding), and no VISA-provided insurance needed to be invoked.

In hindsight, we didn't need to worry about having lots of excess insurance coverage, but it's always a gamble of how much do you pay for peace of mind, and that formula will be different for everyone.
By the same regard, we never needed to show our International Driver's Permits (obtained thru AAA) to anyone, so we could've saved the $15 apiece (plus the cost of the 2 passport photos), but that was cheap, so we were glad we'd gotten those.

As with any car rental anywhere in the world, be sure to inspect the car before you drive off the first time, and be sure the rental company has noted any pre-existing damage.
Our car was brand-new, less than 40 km on the odometer, but we went over it from bumper to bumper to ensure there were no dents or scratches before we left the Europcar lot.


We rented a car through economycarrentals.com.
We picked it up and returned it to Palermo airport.
It came with full insurance and though we don't recall the cost, it was reasonable.
We had the car for almost 4 weeks (we returned it before visiting Palermo at the end of our trip) and had no problems.
We have used our credit card insurance in the past but never needed it.
Now we usually use economycarrentals which usually comes with insurance and usually costs less.


This is a how-deep-is-the-ocean question.
Rent at the airport as you don't need extra effort at that time.
Look at the zero excess option at AutoEurope www.aecar.rentals and you'll have an English help line for any problems.


I (and many contributors to this site) prefer to rent a car through a wholesale consolidator.
The company most often cited here is: www.autoeurope.com and their sister company www.kemwel.com They are part of the same group, but I check prices with both since the sometimes prices differ a bit and therefore I pick the better deal in either site.
They work with the largest rental companies in Europe, such as Avis, Budget, Europcar, Hertz, etc.
I also select the no deductible insurance option (a.k.a. ‘no insurance excess’) since my US car insurance does not cover me abroad.
It’s a bit more expensive, but the deductible can easily amount to €1,000 or more.
Also coverage provided by many credit cards excludes Italy and a handful of other countries.
I’ve rented through both consolidator websites above (generally selecting Europcar or Hertz as the rental provider, as they tend to have cheaper rates).
When you return the car make sure you obtain receipt that you filled your tank (I also take a picture of the dashboard showing the full gasoline gauge).
I often get charged for fuel charges after the fact when I’m back home and having those records allow me to dispute the extra charge with my credit card.
Don’t forget that to drive in Europe you need an International Driver’s Permit (obtainable in 10 minutes at any AAA office with $15 and 2 passport photos).
The IDP is a translation of your home driver’s license in multiple languages.
The rental car office won't ask you for one, but if you get pulled over by the police and you don't have one you might incur into fines or arrest.
I also recommend to take a GPS unit from home with European maps loaded on it (Maps available on Amazon) and an old fashioned paper map for planning your itinerary and also as a back up since GPS navigators are sometimes inaccurate.
You can buy a map locally.


Regarding the rental location, I would first visit Palermo on arrival for a day or two (you won't need a car while in Palermo).
Then after a couple of nights there, I would rent a car from a city location and get out of town with a car.
Palermo's traffic is legendary, however I found it not to be bad at all outside of commuting peak hours.
Just pick up the car later in the morning (at around 10), when everybody is working in the office, and you'll be fine.


I had a short rental in Sicily a year ago.
From my limited experience: 1.
I did web research on cars and costs and ended up renting from Sixt at the Palermo Airport.
No problems, brand new car, reasonable rates, good staff.
I got a small discount when I reserved in advance over the net with a nonrefundable rental commitment.
2.
I was very pleased to pay for the zero-deductible insurance, for several reasons.
My credit card insurance would have covered me, but the advance payment and paperwork hassle would have been huge, would I have had the papers they require, such as police report, estimates, etc.?
Would the rental company and police have accepted that I really had this coverage?
Probably not.
Also, zero-deductible insurance eliminates any incentive rental staff might have to "find" some damage they say you caused, and you say you did not.
Especially important if you drop off the car without an in-person inspection.
3.
Be sure you know how to get the car into reverse before you leave the rental lot -- I did not, it was a new and strange way to me, and caused me some grief, before I found someone who could help me, in a parking lot far away.
The car had no manual in it.
4.
Road driving is great.
I would avoid driving in large or small cities as much as you can.
The car is nice to have in the countryside.
Even small cities are very congested, very hard to find your way around, parking in cities is quite unavailable and done in weird ways, I found.
And often even small cities seem to have the dreaded ZTLs.
There were a couple of times that I arrived in a town planning to stop, had no street map, could not find ANY parking space, came upon a ZTKL sign, and left town without stopping at all.
5.
Returning the car to the Palermo Airport was easy, however as I approached from the west, I started looking for a gas station to fill up about 20 minutes before the airport, and found none.
I ended up driving east past the airport for about 15 minutes til I found a station, filled up, and returned to the airport.
The station attendant told me that was the closest station to the airport.


First, You won't need a car in Palermo.
Option 1: If you wait until you get to Cefalu you can rent from AutoEurope and get an Europcar or Avis car.
Option 2: Palermo departure day, take a taxi to Palmero airport and rent from Carrentals.com.
You'll have Hertz, Budget, Avis, and much more to choose from.

Second, If you have CDW already on your policy at home or from you credit card company you won't need it.
You don't need the othe optional insurances.
The other one you need is CDW.

Best suggestions given already: inspect the car before you drive away and before you turn it in; fill the tank and save the receipt, or take a picture of the fuel gauge.

Always have your IDPs with you.
They are required in Italy.
You may never be asked to show it but it's the law!

We'll be there in October.
From Palmero we have a private transfer to our Trapani rental.
In route we are doing a private tour.
When we leave Trapani we're renting from Avis at Trapani Airport.
Regards to AAA, I planned on using my coupon for a Hertz rental, too.
However, we need an automatic and they only have highest priced ones remainng.
Avis had more car choices.


I rent my cars through expedia.co.uk finding them to have the best all around rates.
For example, our last trip to France, Hertz has the best rate, €155 for 8 days, with Super CDW added the total came to €617 or €77 a day for a small SUV with automatic trans and Nav (which I didn't need, but was all they had) including the second driver fee waived in Avignon dropping the car at the Nice airport.
By the way, drop charges are obscene in the EU.
In November, picked the car up at the Palermo airport after enjoying the city, and dropped it at Catania, for about €400 for 4 days with Super CDW and the drop charge of €47+/-.
I am a firm believer in the Super CDW for Southern Europe given the road conditions and sometime narrow streets-on our last trip we went through a village with streets so narrow we had to collapse the mirrors.
On their website, put in p/u and drop cities, and several choices and agencies will be shown-personally, a will not rent from Sixt in Italy, however, never had a problem with them elsewhere.


I second the recommendation of checking Autoeurope and/or Kemwel.
For my most recent trip, I rented from Hertz through Autoeurope.
Their rate for the same car compared to the Hertz website was less and included the full insurance.
(this was on the Hertz website with AAA discount) CDW is automatically included in the rate when you rent in Italy, but Hertz generally tries to do a very hard upsell at the counter for the very expensive additional protection.
Unfortunately, I forgot what my deductible was but it was minimal.
It was also nice to not be nagged at the counter.
Note, I have also rented a car numerous times and waived the extra insurance, preferring to self insure.
I figure that we go often enough that the money I have saved by waiving it will cover an incident.

However, I had a friend at work have a horrible time clearing a claim on a car in Italy.
After hearing her story (however, it was not with Hertz) I have decided I will use the full insurance option with the companies listed above.
It is worth the piece of mind to not stress about it.


I just returned from a trip to Sicily.
I rented a car from the UK Autoeurope site.
My cost for 9 days was £90, less than $140.
The rental was through Sicily by Car, I think they are the low cost wing of Europe Car.
I picked up the car in Palermo.
The office was in a good location for heading to Cefalu, one block from the road that went straight to Cefalu, no turns just drietto--drietto straight to Cefalu.
Booking options from Cefalu were much more limited and more expensive than in Palermo.
from my experience there was no need to backtrack to the airport.
As for insurance you're on your own.
I get CDW with my credit card.
Brad


Oh my gosh!!
So much great information and feedback!!
Thank you all!
My girlfriend will be the one renting the car, driving and putting it on her credit card so I thought the least I could do was the leg work.
If she is most comfortable with getting the insurance, we will be happy to go along.
I spoke to my VISA benefits and the do cover on top of the required CDW/TP in Italy if we decline any further insurance.
Yes, the biggest positive for getting the SDW seems to be less hassle if a claim does need to be filed.

We actually visited the Rick Steve's office in Edmonds, WA for a consult since we are lucky enough to live in Seattle and our consultant said we would want a rental car at least part of the time, especially to go inland.
We can travel by train along the coast easily it sounds like.
We are still trying to decide if we will get one for the whole trip, in Palermo, in Cefalu, or just for a number of days .
We will be there for 9 days total.

Again, all of this information is SO helpful!!
Thank you and if you think of anything else, I would LOVE to hear it!


I flew into Palermo, stayed a couple of nights, then left my luggage at the hotel and took the train to Cefalu with an overnight bag for 2 nights (1 day), returned to Palermo to pick up my stuff and the rental car.
I used AutoEurope (best price of the sites I checked) and got Hertz.
In spite of many warnings not to drive in Palermo, it was a lot easier to get the car from a city location and not schlep out to the airport with my luggage just to rent a car.
I took a taxi to Hertz.
The drive out of the city was short and simple to the highway.
This worked for me since I was planning to start with the southwestern part of the island.
At Hertz they offered to upgrade me to a pretty large car which I refused.
I ended up with a smaller Fiat - but not nearly the smallest.

Does your friend know how to drive a manual transmission?
If you must have an automatic, you are better off with a large rental office (like the airport) where there are more cars.
Even if you've reserved an automatic, it may not be there at a smaller location.
I would confirm a day in advance that they have the car.

One quirk - the car engine automatically shut off when I was stopped and in neutral.
At first I thought maybe I was killing the motor by misusing the clutch, but then I realized that it would automatically start again when I depressed the clutch.
It's a gas-saving thing.

My rental included insurance.
Even so, at Hertz they tried to sell me additional insurance for glass (windows, mirrors) which wasn't otherwise covered.
If you're thinking of using your credit card insurance, go to their website and read the fine print on insurance conditions.
Go to gemut.com and download - and read thoroughly - their brochure "what you should know about renting a car in Europe."
You can also get rental quotes from them.
They are competitive.

Edit: It's not clear if you are thinking about renting a car right after your flight and if it is a long-haul flight.
I would not recommend trying to drive in Sicily after a long flight and jetlag.


You can also decline the insurance through the auto rental company and insure your rental car through trip insurance.
The trip insurance is generally less expensive than what the rental company changes.
On our last trip we were going to purchase trip insurance anyway because of a very ill family member (not going on the trip), so we added the car onto the policy.
You need to present coverage at the rental car pickup in order to decline their insurance.
We've had some surprising fees occasionally tacked onto the car rental in the past, so we decided to ensure the car more fully to reduce the worry if an accident or damage were to occur.
From what I've read, some insurance companies require auto rental theft insurance for Italy.
Rick has a very nice writeup somewhere on this website about what to consider if pondering trip insurance.


Who wants me to Dubai?
I found a place where you can orendovat good cars.
There is a telephone number +971 56 344 1149.
I hope I have helped someone.
I myself have used their services.I was very pleased.



####
document number 12: 
How Oprah’s iconic ‘you get a car’ moment ended on a sour note


The moment where Oprah screamed "you get a car" became so iconic, people turned it into a meme.
Picture: YouTube

Source:Supplied


WHEN people think of the Oprah show, they usually think of two iconic moments: Winfrey repeatedly screaming "you get a car", and Tom Cruise jumping on a couch.

A three-part podcast titled Making Oprah: The inside story of a TV revolution explores Winfrey’s rise to fame, and reveals that the car giveaway episode ended on a sour note for some.

The podcast, hosted by journalist Jenn White, explains that the concept for the mega car giveaway actually started with Winfrey’s best friend, Gayle King.

King sat next to an executive from the Pontiac car company on a flight and struck up a conversation.

After that chance meeting, Pontiac offered the show 25 cars for a giveaway.

But the producers weren’t satisfied.
They kept pushing and pushing until the manufacturer finally agreed to gift a brand new G6 to every member of the studio audience.

The value of the 276 cars to Pontiac was about $US7.7m ($9.84m)

But Winfrey — who was heavily committed to authenticity and good intentions — was still dubious about the giveaway.

"When we sat down and started to talk about the car giveaway, I asked ‘how do we find people who really need cars?’
Because that would make it worth it to me ... that would give it a depth and an intention," she recalls.

The show’s producers set to work finding people for the studio audience for whom a new car would be a big deal.
To do this (without giving away the surprise), they asked questions on the audience application like "how do you get to work?"
and "how old is your car?"

"For the most part, the whole audience genuinely needed new cars, and that made it even more special," says Terry Goulder, one of the senior producers of the episode.


The episode was slated for the premiere of the 19th season, as they needed to kick ratings off with a bang.

A lot was riding on the successful execution of the surprise.
And as staff on the show reflect, "Oprah was always obsessed with detail".

"I remember the night before the show, I could not sleep," recalls Winfrey.

"First of all, I didn’t leave the building until 10.30/11pm because I remember walking through seeing [the producers] putting the bows on the cars and the bows were too small in my opinion, so I said ‘the bows are too small’ and they said ‘but we’ve already done most of the bows’ and I go ‘you gotta redo the bows, because the bows should cover the whole hood of the car,’" she says.

"You want the bow to make an impression, because so much of a gift is about how it’s packaged."

So they worked through the night and redid the bows.

For the staged surprise to have maximum impact, it relied heavily on misdirection.

"The car giveaway is a surprise because they ‘fake it out’," explains the podcast’s presenter Jenn White.

Winfrey brought 11 teachers on stage who all desperately needed a new car, and announced that their "wildest dream" was coming true.

"The audience was all sitting back as observers at this stage, thinking ‘isn’t that nice for them, they got a brand-new car,’" recalls Winfrey.
"That was the fun of it".

The host then announced that a 12th car would be given away.
Each member of the studio audience would receive a box and in one of those boxes, would be the key to the car.

The beauty was that there was a key in every box.

Producer Terry Goulder remembers that the studio audience was so "supercharged" on that particular day, he had taken the precaution of having paramedics on site, in case somebody had a heart attack.

The audience members weren’t the only ones with high blood pressure.

"My heart was pounding so hard ... because I was as excited for the people getting the cars, as the people were for getting the cars," recalls Winfrey.

And as for "you get a car" moment, which became so infamous it was turned into a meme, "I was screaming as loudly as I could because [the audience was] screaming so loud ...
I was trying to be heard over what at this point was just happy chaos," says Winfrey.

Producer Gina Sprehe refers to it as a highlight of her career.

"We didn’t know it would go that well ... it was just magical ... when you watch 276 people have total meltdowns, you’re just so happy for them.
It’s so nice to see people that happy."

Unfortunately, the people who produced the show soon lost that euphoric feeling.

Terry Goulder believes they made a rod for their own back with that particular episode.

"It was really hard to produce shows after that, because all the audience wanted cars," he says.

Producer Lisa Erspamer was also left with a bad taste in her mouth.

"It was devastating after, because ‘gift tax’ is a thing, and it’s always a complicated thing when you’re giving stuff away," she says.

"But we paid for the sales tax and the registration for each car, and we told the audience after, if they didn’t want to have to pay a gift tax, they could actually take cash for the car," she explains.

"And because we didn’t pay the gift tax, people complained to the press, and that was devastating."

As White says in the podcast, "You can understand why some of the audience might be annoyed with getting a bill of up to $US7,000 ($8,900) depending on your tax bracket ... but you can also understand the producers looking at that and going ‘we just gave you a car?’"

"We put our whole soul into this moment of television and with real intention to do something good, and so when people had a negative reaction, it like literally hurt our feelings," says Erspamer.

"You know, we’re people and it made us really sad."



####
document number 13: 
Didn’t pick up your rental car?
No problem.


"Some rental car companies have been afraid to charge for no-shows with the fear that their competitors won’t and it would be used as a marketing campaign against them," said John Healy, who follows the car rental industry for Northcoast Research.

This is just one of the stories from our "I’ve Always Wondered" series, where we tackle all of your questions about the world of business, no matter how big or small.
Ever wondered if recycling is worth it?
Or how store brands stack up against name brands?
Check out more from the series here.


For flakes, the rental car industry is a beautiful thing.
That’s because unlike the airline and hotel industries, the rental car business generally doesn’t penalize customers for bailing on reservations.
Even at the very last minute.

In fact, you could go online right now and book 10 reservations at 10 different car rental companies and make your decision at the airport.

"[You can] go to the line that’s shortest and take that booking, and just leave the others by the wayside," said Chris Brown, executive editor of Auto Rental News.

Or you can leave all of them by the wayside.

How did this little island of forgiveness survive in such an unforgiving travel industry?

Back when the business began, auto manufacturers like Ford and General Motors owned car rental companies, said John Healy, who follows the industry for Northcoast Research.
He said manufacturers used rentals as a way of getting some payoff for models they overproduced and couldn’t sell.

"Some rental car operators thought about their business not in terms of making money on renting the cars," Healy explained.
"But from an alleviation of stress on the manufacturing side of the business."

But operators are thinking about money now.
No-show rates are easily above 20 percent, and companies that use third-party sites like Expedia and Kayak pay about $5 a reservation whether people show up or not.
That’s roughly $15 million down the drain every year, according to Healy.

Even so, policies are unlikely to change unless all the players get on board.

"Some rental car companies have been afraid to charge for no-shows with the fear that their competitors won’t and it would be used as a marketing campaign against them," Healy explained.

The closest the industry has come is prepaid reservations, where you get a cheaper deal but pay a stiff penalty if you bail.

To further protect themselves, companies routinely overbook.
But if they get the numbers wrong, they may end up doing the unthinkable — point customers to the competition, like Mark Dufresne.

He owns Marathon Car Rental, a small company in Los Angeles.

"We’ll get calls from people standing in line at the airport at car rental companies going ‘I have a reservation and I’ve been standing in line for three hours and they’re waiting for cars to return — do you have any cars?’"
Dufresne said.

He said sometimes customers practically beg him to take their credit card information when they reserve over the phone.

"Customers feel sometimes that by giving their credit card, they’re guaranteed to have a car," Dufresne explained.

But it doesn’t make a difference, he said.
So, flakes — rejoice.
Your friends may get mad at you, but rental car companies won’t hold a grudge.

As a nonprofit news organization, our future depends on listeners like you who believe in the power of public service journalism.

Your investment in Marketplace helps us remain paywall-free and ensures everyone has access to trustworthy, unbiased news and information, regardless of their ability to pay.

Donate today — in any amount — to become a Marketplace Investor.
Now more than ever, your commitment makes a difference.



####
document number 14: 
Silvercar


Last weekend, I went to Austin for the first time.
Of course, I was unable to resist trying out yet another travel-related startup in the process.
I’ve already got a good thing going on my drive to and from SFO with DriveNow, I breeze through security with TSA Precheck (While I participate in the program, I don’t totally agree with it.
For one thing, I’ve been classified as not so dangerous that I need a full body scan or pat-down, but still shady enough that I should still be checked for metal.
), and I comfortably fly Virgin America (or at least get upgraded on a legacy carrier) when possible.
I thought that I had my rental car experience figured out as well by signing up for Avis Preferred (as well as the rewards programs for a few others), which in most locations allows you to have a more efficient rental experience.
It turns out, there’s an even better way: Silvercar.

Silvercar is a car rental company.
There are a few things that make it a little different than the average car rental company, and most of their advantages center around simplicity.

Car The only car that you can get with Silvercar is an Audi A4.
You don’t even pick the color—they’re all silver.
I like this, because I never know what I’m going to get with the other car rental companies.
I usually get "upgraded" to a random SUV.
The A4 is a comfortable, good-looking car.
I had fun driving it.

Reservation You can reserve a car on their website or via their app.
I used the website.
It’s quick and easy, and there aren’t 20 screens of upselling.

Pickup When we landed in Austin, I opened up the app, and tapped a button which loaded up a text message containing my reservation number to send to Silvercar.
A few minutes after texting them, they called me and told me where to wait outside.
They showed up a few minutes later in a silver A4, checked my license and credit card (only done for first-time drivers) and drove us to the off-airport rental facility.
There, while one employee transferred our luggage into the rental car, the other showed us how everything worked.
Scanning a QR code with the app unlocked the doors.
From there, he showed us an overview of the computer system, such as how to navigate, use the radio, and pair my phone.
It is nice to have Bluetooth, but for whatever reason, Silvercar seems to be really excited about it.
At some locations, you don’t even have to go through all of that; you can just walk right up to your car, scan, and go.
In any case, I was just happy that I didn’t have to wait in line at a counter or wait for a bus.

Return When we picked the car up, they asked us to give them a call when we were on our way back to the airport since we were returning on Sunday, which is a busy day.
On Sunday, we called and let them know that we were on our way.
I’m not sure how necessary that was.
When we arrived, one of the employees hopped in the driver’s seat and drove us to the curbside drop-off area.
We got out, he handed us our bags, and that was it.
I received a receipt via email a few minutes later.

Pricing When I first looked into Silvercar, I thought that they had standard pricing, with a set weekday rate and weekend rate, as the rates were published prominently on their homepage.
However, it looks like the prices do fluctuate like any other company.
They could really win me over if they had a more stable rate (I was pretty annoyed to be hit with a ridiculous demand-based rate at our hotel, for example), but it’s not like you don’t get a quote before you make the reservation.

Update on October 1, 2013:

Silvercar sent me a note to clarify that they do have stable rates of $89 per day on weekdays (Monday – Thursday) and $59 per day on weekends (Friday – Sunday).
If your reservation includes both weekdays and weekend days, they’ll display the average daily rate of your reservation.

They do still have a win with the fuel pricing, though.
Rather than a bunch of confusing fuel options, you can either return the car full or not.
If the tank isn’t full, they’ll top it off, charge you the local market rate for gas, plus a $5 fee.
On my rental I used 3.6 gallons of gas, so I paid $13.93 ($3.59*3.6 + $5) and didn’t have to hunt around for a gas station on the way to the airport.

There are plenty of things that Silvercar doesn’t charge for at all, that tend to be add-ons with other rental companies.
They don’t charge extra fees for electronic tolls; they’ll simply charge whatever the actual toll amount was.
Even though everyone just navigates with their phones anyway, the car comes with an included navigation system.
The car has free WiFi, but we didn’t use it.
Though I didn’t try this, there’s no cost to add a driver to the reservation, and it’s super-easy.
I had the opposite experience a year ago with Avis.
When we went up to the counter to add the driver, the guy first informed us: "Well, you can, but it’s $13 extra per day."
Ok… we thought that was annoying, but had to do it since I wouldn’t be returning the car, and asked to add a driver.
The agent warned: "You’ll have to fill out a form."
He then paused to see if, after we already agreed on the price, we would be okay with doing some paperwork.
We then found out why he warned us.
It took probably 10-15 long minutes to make that one change: filling out a paper form, having the agent do who-knows-what on an ancient computer, and finally receiving a new copy of the agreement printed with a dot-matrix printer.
At least it wasn’t like the time that they refused to add someone as a driver on another reservation over the phone (which Silvercar is happy to do), affecting my family’s travel plans.
This industry deserves to be disrupted.

The rough edges Overall, using Silvercar was a great experience, and I only have a few pieces of feedback to improve it.

When I first tried to alert Silvercar that we had arrived, I tried to send the text message via Google Voice.
Unfortunately, the app didn’t pass along the message content to Google Voice, so I had to do it via a standard text.
It’d be nice if the app worked with Google Voice or didn’t rely on SMS at all.

When we were ready to return the car, I tapped the button on the app to navigate back to the rental car location using Google Maps.
We were taken to an office park near the airport.
The app needs to be updated with the correct address.
We ended up using the built-in Audi navigation system to get to the right place.
The Audi system definitely needs some work.
The ordering of upcoming turns read from bottom to top (the next turn was at the bottom of the list), which made it confusing when preparing for the next turn.
The distance units were incorrect, as it’d warn of turns coming up in 200 yards, that were actually only 200 feet away, adding to the confusion.

There has been an app update since I used it, and Silvercar’s support staff did say my feedback would go to the right department, so it’s possible that those bugs have already been fixed.

Finally, when we got out of the car at the curb and the employee helped us with our bags, there was that strange feeling that maybe I was supposed to tip (I didn’t), and I hate the ambiguity of that.
If we weren’t supposed to tip, it’d be nice if Silvercar were upfront about it.
And if a tip was expected, they should change that, either by including it in the standard rate or offering it as an option, like "If you give me a dollar, I’ll carry your bag for you."
You know, like any other transaction.
Based on the fact that it’s a newer company and I’ve never had to tip in any other rental car situation, I’m assuming that it was just me being paranoid and that there was no expectation of a gratuity.

Would I use it again?
Yes, absolutely.
Silvercar is way better than a standard rental car company.
They’re only in a few cities right now, but if you’re lucky enough to be renting a car in Dallas, Austin, Houston, San Francisco, or Los Angeles, check out Silvercar.

Trying out startups when I travel continues to be fun.
I even stumbled across another car-sharing service (that according to Wikipedia has actually been operating since 2008) while walking around Austin.
Next up: BlackJet?
I wish.
On the non-travel front, I was hoping to write about how Prim has changed my life.
I did try it out, and I got really used to not having to do laundry.
Unfortunately, after a month and a half of using the service, one of the co-founders emailed me and let me know that the service was no longer available in my area "due to low user density."
Now, after experiencing life with Prim, it feels like doing laundry takes forever.
Whenever I get a glimpse of how much better things can be, I wish the future would just hurry up and get here.
Fortunately, now is pretty good too.



####
document number 15: 
Civil Rights Act of 1964


The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the nation's premier civil rights legislation.
The Act outlawed discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, required equal access to public places and employment, and enforced desegregation of schools and the right to vote.
It did not end discrimination, but it did open the door to further progres

Although the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments outlawed slavery, provided for equal protection under the law, guaranteed citizenship, and protected the right to vote, individual states continued to allow unfair treatment of minorities and passed Jim Crow laws allowing segregation of public facilities.
These were upheld by the Supreme Court in Plessy v.
Ferguson (1895), which found state laws requiring racial segregation that were "separate but equal" to be constitutional.
This finding help continue legalized discrimination well into the 20th century.

Following World War II, pressures to recognize, challenge, and change inequalities for minorities grew.
One of the most notable challenges to the status quo was the 1954 landmark Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas which questioned the notion of "separate but equal" in public education.
The Court found that "separate educational facilities are inherently unequal" and a violation of the 14th Amendment.
This decision polarized Americans, fostered debate, and served as a catalyst to encourage federal action to protect civil rights.

Many Attempts at Change


Marshals standing by fence near crowd during the March on Washington, 1963


Each year, from 1945 until 1957, Congress considered and failed to pass a civil rights bill.
Congress finally passed limited Civil Rights Acts in 1957 and 1960, but they offered only moderate gains.
As a result of the 1957 Act, the United States Commission on Civil Rights was formed to investigate, report on, and make recommendations to the President concerning civil rights issues.
Sit-ins, boycotts, Freedom Rides, the founding of organizations such as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), local demands for inclusion in the political process, all were in response to the increase in legislative activity through the 1950s and early 1960s.

1963 was a crucial year for the Civil Rights Movement.
Social pressures continued to build with events such as the Birmingham Campaign, televised clashes between peaceful protesters and authorities, the murders of civil rights workers Medgar Evers and William L. Moore, the March on Washington, and the deaths of four young girls in the bombing of Birmingham's 16th Street Baptist Church.
There was no turning back.
Civil rights were firmly on the national agenda and the federal government was forced to respond.

The Civil Rights Act is Born; A President is Assasinated


President John F. Kennedy addresses the nation on civil rights, June 11, 1963


In response to the report of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, President John F. Kennedy proposed, in a nationally televised address, a Civil Rights Act of 1963.
A week after his speech, Kennedy submitted a bill to Congress addressing civil rights (H.R. 7152).
He urged African American leaders to use caution when demonstrating since new violence might alarm potential supporters.
Kennedy met with businessmen, religious leaders, labor officials, and other groups such as CORE and NAACP, while also maneuvering behind the scenes to build bipartisan support and negotiate compromises over controversial topics.

Following Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, both Martin Luther King, Jr. and newly inaugurated President Lyndon B.
Johnson continued to press for passage of the bill – as King noted in a January 1964 newspaper column, legislation "will feel the intense focus of Negro interest...It became the order of the day at the great March on Washington last summer.
The Negro and his white compatriots for self-respect and human dignity will not be denied."

The House of Representatives debated H.R. 7152 for nine days, rejecting nearly 100 amendments designed to weaken the bill.
It passed the House on February 10, 1964 after 70 days of public hearings, appearances by 275 witnesses, and 5,792 pages of published testimony.

Final Challenges Before Passage


President Lyndon B.
Johnson signing the 1964 Civil Rights Act, July 2, 1964.


The real battle was waiting in the Senate, however, where concerns focused on the bill's expansion of federal powers and its potential to anger constituents who might retaliate in the voting booth.
Opponents launched the longest filibuster in American history, which lasted 57 days and brought the Senate to a virtual standstill.

Senate minority leader Everett Dirksen nurtured the bill through compromise discussions and ended the filibuster.
Dirksen's compromise bill passed the Senate after 83 days of debate that filled 3,000 pages in the Congressional Record.
The House moved quickly to approve the Senate bill.

Within hours of its passage on July 2, 1964 President Lyndon B.
Johnson, with Martin Luther King, Jr., Dorothy Height, Roy Wilkins, John Lewis, and other civil rights leaders in attendance, signed the bill into law, declaring once and for all that discrimination for any reason on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin was illegal in the United States of America.

Quickfacts


What is it?
A landmark piece of civil rights legislation.

Significance: Outlawed discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, color, or national origin.

Associated Sites: The United States Capitol, The White House



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = chemical spill
document number 1: 
Civil Trial Against BP Seeks To Place Blame For Gulf Oil Spill


AUDIE CORNISH, HOST:

From NPR News, this is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.
I'm Audie Cornish.

Today in New Orleans, a civil trial began in the case of the BP explosion and oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
The disaster happened almost three years ago, April 2010.
Millions of barrels of oil poured into the Gulf, 11 workers were killed.
BP has already pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
Now, billions of dollars are at stake in these civil proceedings.

NPR's Jeff Brady was in the courtroom today and he joins us now.
And, Jeff, to start, opening statements, what did you hear?

JEFF BRADY, BYLINE: Well, it was just opening statements and just kind of highlighting what attorneys plan to argue in this case.
More than six hours of opening statements from eight different parties, starting with lawyers for the plaintiffs.
That's the federal government, the five Gulf Coast states affected and a group representing thousands of individual plaintiffs.
Their message was fairly uniform, that BP and its contractors put profit before safety and the environment.

They planned to argue that managers knew the crew on the Deepwater Horizon didn't have enough training, that equipment was faulty and that means the disaster could have been prevented.
Now, the defense has countered those arguments, but then just as we've heard kind of all along leading up to this trial, they pointed fingers at each other.

The owner of the rig, Transocean, essentially said that this was BP's fault.
It was the operator of the well.
That means that BP was in charge and that Transocean employees were victims here, too.
The lawyer for Halliburton, which did the cement job for the well, said it was BP and Transocean's fault for losing control of the well.
BP's lawyer said rather than pointing fingers in the trial, they'll be pointing to facts.
So, nice little one-liner there.
The company has argued all along that this was a series of mistakes that lead to the disaster that killed 11 crewmen and that massive oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.

CORNISH: And, Jeff, I want you to tell us a little more about settlement, because there had been a lot of talk about a settlement but I guess that didn't happen?

BRADY: No.
It didn't happen.
They've been negotiating over the past year.
BP has been talking with the Department of Justice and the states affected.
And we've heard that those negotiations continued through last night.
I'm surprised that it wasn't settled today.
I can't imagine the BP executives want all these events rehashed in the media again.

But they maintain the company was not grossly negligent, and that's the big question here.
They say they're ready to prove that.
You know, that could be the company's strategy for settlement negotiations.
You know, make it seem like they have a good case and get the plaintiffs to agree to a smaller settlement.
We don't know what their strategy is.
Maybe the trial will play out and the judge will decide the case, or maybe this will be settled.

CORNISH: And as we mentioned, BP already pleaded guilty to criminal charges.
It's paying $4.5 billion in fines.
So explain to us how this case is different from that one.

BRADY: Well, this is about what happened leading up to that explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon and who's responsible for it.
Allocating liability.
That's a term we hear a lot in this phase of the case.
And, boy, you know, there is a lot of money at stake here.
Under the Clean Water Act, up to $17.5 billion in fines that BP could be subject to.
That's a little lower than originally thought, actually, because both sides agreed to exclude about 810,000 barrels of oil that was collected at the blowout site.
But we're still talking tens of billions of dollars.

CORNISH: And a few seconds left here, Jeff.
What happens next?
Is this trial going to go on for a long time?

BRADY: You know, it's always hard to predict how long these trials are going to go on for.
But the folks who are involved here, the lawyers predict about three months.
So we could be well into May here before this trial wraps up.

CORNISH: NPR's Jeff Brady, joining us from New Orleans.
Jeff, thank you.

BRADY: Thank you, Audie.

Copyright © 2013 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 2: 
RAF jets strike chemical weapon facility in Syria


A Tornado GR4 from 903 Expeditionary Air Wing (EAW), based out of Royal Air Force Akrotiri.
Crown copyright.


At 0200 UK time on 14 April, British forces joined close Allies in a precision strike on Syrian installations involved in the regime’s use of chemical weapons against its own people.
The strike was launched as a response to the chemical weapon attack on 7 April in Douma which killed up to 75 people, including young children; a significant body of information, including intelligence, indicates that the Syrian regime was responsible for this latest attack.

As the Prime Minister has made clear, this pattern of behaviour must be stopped, not just to protect innocent people in Syria from these horrific weapons, but also because the erosion cannot be allowed of the international norms that prevent the use of chemical weapons.

Our action is proportionate, specifically aimed at degrading the regime’s ability to use chemical weapons and deterring further such appalling acts; it is therefore focused on regime facilities linked to the production and use of chemical weapons.

The UK element of the carefully coordinated joint action was contributed by four Royal Air Force Tornado GR4s and four RAF Typhoon FG4s in support.
The Tornados launched eight Storm Shadow missiles at the Him Sinshar chemical weapons storage site.
The military facility was a former missile base, located some fifteen miles west of Homs, where the regime is assessed to keep chemical weapon precursors stockpiled in breach of Syria’s obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Very careful scientific analysis was applied to determine where best to target the Storm Shadows to maximise the destruction of the stockpiled chemicals and to minimise any risks of contamination to the surrounding area.
The facility which was struck is located some distance from any known concentrations of civilian habitation, reducing yet further any such risk.

Detailed analysis of the effectiveness of the strike is currently underway, but initial indications are that the precision of the Storm Shadow weapons and meticulous target planning have resulted in a successful attack.

Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson said:

The reprehensible use of chemical weapons in Douma is further evidence of the Syrian regime’s appalling cruelty against its own people.
We will not stand by whilst innocent civilians, including women and children, are killed and made to suffer.
The international community has responded decisively with legal and proportionate military force.
Let these united actions send a clear message to the regime – the use of chemical weapons is categorically unacceptable and you will be held to account.



####
document number 3: 
MINIMAL PACKING FOR A LISBON CITY BREAK + MY PACKING TIPS




A capsule wardrobe has always had my interest, however I don’t think I could ever downsize my wardrobe to just 10 items that I would love.
I have so many individual pieces inside of my wardrobe that spark that so-called joy that I couldn’t get rid of.
However, a capsule wardrobe does seem like an interesting approach to me if you’re off on a city break.
That’s why I decided to dip my toe into minimal packing for my trip to Lisbon this weekend and talk you through how I prepared and picked my items for this trip.


I definitely am not a light packer, and whenever I go on city trips I always have to really think about what I want to bring with me.
My cousins and I are in Lisbon for 3,5 days.
We arrive tomorrow evening and leave on Sunday evening.
That means I will probably need about 8 outfits in total.
Four for when we go exploring by day and four for when we go out for dinner.
I tried to really keep my stash for those 8 outfits as minimal as possible.
So I went for 10 clothing items in total, this obviously doesn’t include underwear and pyjamas and stuff.
I was actually trying to strive towards 8 items, but that’s not doable for me, as I also am bringing quite a lot of white items.
I happen to know myself quite well and know I will have at least one food spill down myself while I am in Lisbon, since I am also planning on wearing quite a lot of white, I thought it would be better to bring just two more backup items.



Check the weather app


The first thing I did, as I think we all do when we go abroad, is check the weather app.
I was really hoping for some lovely summer-y weather, and the way it’s looking right now – as I am typing this blog post – it’s supposed to be 21-23 degrees Celsius, which sounds like an absolute dream to me.
Once you know what kind of weather it will be at your destination, it becomes so much easier to pack your stuff.
I was actually still quite confused as to what I should pack on my day of travelling there, as it’s still quite chilly here in the Netherlands, whereas in Lisbon summer pretty much has arrived.
However, I know that Lisbon is quite a tricky city as it can get quite windy and since it’s not officially summer yet it can also feel quite chilly there.
That’s why I decided to be sure and bring two jackets, one super light camouflage jacket and my leather jacket which I will be wearing on my flight with my jumper since it’s still quite cold here.


Plan your outfits


Another thing that is quite obvious is to start planning outfits you would like to wear while you’re away on your city break.
There are always a few items you know you want to bring because they are new pieces, summer pieces you haven’t worn that much yet or because you know they look good on you.
I always pack the items I feel excited about first.
In this case that was a jumpsuit I had actually bought in December but didn’t get around to wearing yet and my linen trousers I bought during summer last year that I was super excited to get out again.
There is a pair of trousers that I wore in

this blog post

, that I would love to bring too but I already have 10 items, so I am pretty sure I am either going to leave those at home or swap one of my pairs of trousers out with that pair.
Anyway, I decided to have a little clothing party earlier this week.
I got lots of my items out of my closet and just started putting items of clothing on to see what would look cute with these outfits.
I also checked to see what shoes I wanted to wear with the outfits.



Comfy shoes


You know you are going to be doing a lot of walking when you’re on a city break.
I at least always do whenever I am away.
One of the most annoying things in life is wearing a wrong pair of shoes while going away on a city trip.
This has happened to me once while I was in Edinburgh and let met tell you, I was not that great of a company to my friend.
Comfortable shoes are everything while you’re on a city trip.
In my case comfortable shoes are always going to be a pair of trainers.
I am going full 90’s dad tourist style because I am bringing my ‘ugly’ ‘dad’ trainers from Adidas.
I know they are super comfortable and I can easily walk in them for hours.

I actually ended up bringing two pairs of shoes as I just don’t want to end up being denied access to a restaurant or club when we decide to go for drinks in Lisbon.
That’s why I also decided to pack a pair of brogues I have had for absolute ages.
I know these are my most comfortable ‘fancy’ pair of shoes that I know I can walk around for a bit.



Bring some tote bags


A little tip I have learnt from my cousin is to always bring at least one tote bag with you while you’re away on a city trip.
Not only are these tote bags great as shopping bags when you’re having a little shopping spree, they are also super handy to use as a camera bag, as I always do.
Besides using it as a camera bag, I also love to put a pair of shoes in them to protect my clothes from the shoe dirt or to use them as dirty laundry bags.
Definitely bring some on your trip, barely take up any space and are so handy to have!


Don’t over pack


Back in the day, okay no 1,5 years ago I wasn’t a smart packer at all.
I have had a couple of trips in 2018 and discovered it’s just not smart to over pack when you’re still at home.
I am still not great at cutting it down a lot, as I know I will need backup items for when I spill food or drinks down myself.
But what you don’t know is if you’re going to fall in love with something while you’re at your city break destination.
That’s why nowadays I always try to leave a bit of space in my suitcase.
This way I know everything will fit into my suitcase again, as well as my liquids bag and a small handbag.
This way I know I don’t have to stress about fitting everything into my 1 piece of luggage on a budget airline flight.



####
document number 4: 
ISIS Chemical-Weapons Expert Speaks


exclusive

Photo Illustration by Lyne Lucien/The Daily Beast


BAGHDAD—"ISIS was looking for scientists," said Ahmed, a 36-year-old follower of the so-called Islamic State who holds a Ph.D. in medicinal chemistry and drug design.
And Ahmed was looking for a chance to put his scientific knowledge to use.

This would not be theoretical research.
ISIS and al Qaeda before it have been working since at least the 1990s to obtain biological and chemical weapons.
But as with many gruesome enterprises, ISIS has been more methodical than its predecessors and competitors.


We do not yet know for sure the extent to which ISIS was successful and cannot confirm some of the claims made by Ahmed, but they fit with those made by an Iraqi geologist, Suleiman al-Afari, who told

The Washington Post

recently that he supervised a mustard gas production line for the Islamic State.

We also know that ISIS, through its global social media and internet recruiting, managed to create a corps of scientists interacting in person and on dark web forums to support the creation of a WMD arsenal, and Ahmed, whose name has been changed here, was part of the team.
We interviewed him last month along with other ISIS prisoners being held in the Iraqi capital.

At the height of its power four years ago, ISIS’ worldwide recruiting effort offered top dollar to equip labs and support scientists to an extent much greater than anything Ahmed had been offered in Iraq, which basically was nothing.

"I knew I could synthesize the biological and chemical weapons I researched on the web," he told us.
"I just needed the supplies and a well-equipped lab."

U.S. coalition and Iraqi forces have recently announced the discovery of an installation in Mosul where ISIS was indeed working on such weapons, and Ahmed says he was involved in that same lab’s operations.

We should be careful not to confuse the attempts by ISIS to develop and use chemical weapons with the infamous attacks launched by the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad.
Of an estimated 300 such attacks in Syria in the course of the conflict there, a new study from the Global Public Policy Institute (PDF) estimates 98 percent are attributable to the regime, and only about 2 percent to ISIS.


But the group’s aspirations in this regard, and some usage, is well documented.
For instance, the group successfully deployed mustard and chlorine gas against the Kurdish Peshmerga.
ISIS also set up a secret chemical weapons production facility in northern Iraq and has been quite innovative in using drones as dispersal devices for biological and chemical materials.

Surprisingly, research on the extent to which the group used or desired to expand on the use of chemical and biological weapons remains rare and largely under-researched, as noted in a report published last year by the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.

Ahmed, imprisoned inside the compounds of the Iraqi Special Operations Forces of the Iraqi Counter Terrorism Services, recounted in detail his rise from a promising but frustrated young scientist, to one who saw himself as a galvanized agent of social change at the time he joined ISIS, to his eventual capture.

Ahmed, like so many who joined and served ISIS, had come into contact with the group via social media while a Ph.D. student in India after a scientist friend, who was already working for them, encouraged him to join up.

While initially attracted to the idea of an "Islamic State," he claimed it was not so much the ideology as what he thought would be the ability to show off his scientific and technical skills that actually drew him to ISIS: "At first I was looking into their ideology because of their interest in science and technology.
I was convinced I would join an authentic scientific community.
Many scientists joined from many countries," he claimed in our interview.
"Lots of nuclear physicists and engineers, especially from Russia joined them."


Ahmed said he did not ever join the group physically, but supported them virtually and substantially.
Searching the worldwide web and pursuing scientific journals, some of which he hacked into, allowed him to pass on knowledge about manufacturing chemical and biological weapons to those scientists already working in the Mosul lab.

While Ahmed started his work for ISIS by spreading this research and interacting on web forums on behalf of the group in 2015 and 2016, he fully intended to join the lab in Mosul upon his graduation and was confident of his ability to create the desired chemical and biological weapons.
At the time, he believed ISIS was already an established state and would continue to expand.

"I would upload and [my research] would get read by the high command of the Caliphate," he told us.
"They were interested in my posts and asked how we can acquire these chemicals.
I also summarized books from a Russian website.
There are loads of [scientific] journals I could access on the web and it’s not classified.
I told them everything was in my summary, but also told them, you must have a real lab."

The operation in Mosul succeeded in producing mustard gas, which it dispersed in various operations using drones.
In Baghdad, we viewed pictures of victims allegedly burned in ISIS mustard gas attacks.

Ahmed and his research colleagues working in the Mosul lab were not the only ISIS members striving for biological weapons.
A chilling arrest occurred as recently as June 2018, in Germany, when Sief Allah H, a Tunisian man living in Cologne, was arrested after preparing the deadly biological poison ricin, made from castor beans.
Security sources told ICSVE—the International Center for the Study of Violent Extremism—that the police knew of his activities and that he was following instructions provided over the internet by ISIS, and that police surveillance of the operation was terminated and arrests made after he succeeded, but before he was actually able to deploy the infamous compound.


Ahmed proudly boasted about his knowledge of computer science and the ability to modify, synthesize, and manufacture lethal weapons from raw substances, at times appearing highly ecstatic and fervent in his answers during the interview.

"There are loads of scientific journals and it’s not classified.
You just have to access them through a scientific institution," said Ahmed, explaining how he managed to access the latest in science by going to the dark web and using a Russian website that cracked these journals’ codes.

"I used Russian search engines that no one can penetrate and a Tor browser to hide and search," Ahmed said.
"For instance, the first item I put up for them was from the journal of Organic Phosphorus Chemistry about VX gas in Israel.
It’s a new generation nerve agent.
The authors told how they made particle Isomers and structural modifications to enhance the activity of the gas in use," Ahmed said.
"I can tell a scientist about how to carry out the organic synthesis for this in micro quantities."

"There was one article on pyrophoric [flammable] materials from a hazardous materials journal," Ahmed went on.
"These pyrophoric materials become flammable with water and moisture creating gas, fire and choking smoke to cause asphyxiation.
The article was speaking about the flammability [of the materials] and what kind of gas was being generated, about the hazardous materials you could throw to troops, and on streets, on floating bridges, etc.
All the necessary materials are available on the market...
There was also a book from a Russian website about the experimental synthesis of all explosives.
For me, I can synthesize any of these.

"My friend [in ISIS] told me about WMD, that they were interested in making mustard gas, nitrogen, and sulfur.
Nerve agents are easy to synthesize," Ahmed said, noting that he was disappointed that ISIS wasn’t going further into the subjects he felt proficient in.

"It’s like writing a paper.
I can search and modify the structure.
I passed this to them.
If I gain access to a lab, then I can do it.
In our lab in India [where he was studying] I learned how to synthesize theoretically.
We take the structure into a software and see how it works on this nerve, then we try it on animals.
I synthesized for anti-diabetic and anti-epileptic activity and it worked, so I know I can do it for these substances as well."

Ahmed, who does not appear particularly connected to his own emotions, insisted that his work for ISIS was to help them as a state to be able to defend against and repel attackers.
When reminded that ISIS had been at war with the Iraqis, Syrians and Western powers at that point, he kept insisting that the weapons he hoped to build for them were only for defense.

He also seemed oblivious to ISIS’s already deployed use of mustard gas against civilian populations.
"My idea was to use weapons as a deterrent, not to be used against humankind."
He also seemed oblivious to the extraordinary brutality of ISIS during the time he was working for them and much more interested in and excited by the recognition he could achieve.

He hoped to branch out from poisons and plagues to explore new technologies for delivering them.
"I learned in the engineering world they [ISIS] were interested in anti-aircraft missiles and drones.
They complain about coalition jet fighters destroying their troops on the ground.
The admin on the website, there was a guy on the website who provided links from a British university to make drones from organic synthesis to make the whole body of the drone.
It was some kind of solution, liquid phase synthesis, polymer science.
We have already developed anti-aircraft missiles.
We were going to use them."


It appears that Ahmed was not particularly religious prior to joining ISIS.
He articulated only a very rudimentary grasp of the Islamic faith, which he said he rarely practiced.
"I was not very religious.
I was not looking for an Islamic State.
They [ISIS] were more interested in science and technology.
They were thinking forward.
My family is interested in science and technology.
I find religion suspicious."

Although incongruous on its face, it has been common for many ISIS recruits to believe that somehow the Caliphate could fulfill their dreams, even if those had little to do with the way ISIS twisted the teachings of the Quran and the sayings of the Prophet Muhammad.

Ahmed said he was deeply dissatisfied with widespread corruption and sectarian discrimination in the Iraqi job market following the 2003 toppling of the Saddam regime.
As a Sunni, and despite being qualified, he felt he was kept out of jobs in areas of national defense and in any government-sector related to science.

"Political things, the quality of the regime after 2003, it pushed me to interact and work against the regime," he said.
"I worked as a student in a lab in Iraq for four years.
It was not possible to gain employment there.
After, I worked in a pharmaceutical lab.
It was totally corrupt.
The whole facility was corrupt and it lacked in everything.
I was completely frustrated.
I considered it a primary school," he said.


Ahmed claimed he was compelled to look for jobs elsewhere, first in Qatar and then Bahrain and Abu Dhabi, but to no avail.
His disconnected personality probably contributed to his failure in that regard, but all the same he was a gifted individual frustrated by his inability to pursue his chosen field—until ISIS came along.

Ahmed was arrested in 2018 by the Kurdish security forces during an undercover counterterrorism operation in Erbil, the capital of the Iraq’s Kurdish regional government.
He was then handed over to the U.S. Army in Erbil for further interrogation and later transferred to Iraqi authorities in Baghdad.

While Ahmed claimed he had stopped working for ISIS after he looked more closely into their violent Islamic ideology, he continued to see himself, as many jihadists are encouraged to do, as a sort of chivalric hero and, in his case, a chemical whiz kid.

During our interview, he expressed regret over his decision to join ISIS.

"My advice to everyone in the world is not to believe [ISIS] propaganda and media.
Real jihad is to support your country and families and provide them with the best knowledge.
Don’t believe ISIS or join any upcoming group."

At the same time, he seemed to still be angling for a job in his chosen field.
Appearing to think we could bounce him out of prison, he offered to help the Americans now to fight ISIS.
He had made a similar egotistic offer to the Peshmerga and also to others who had handled him following his capture.

Ahmed’s story serves to demonstrate ISIS’ horrifying ambitions and tryst with chemical and biological weapons in Iraq and Syria, nearly actualized through their power to attract scientists like him from around the globe.

These experts are capable of researching methods for and carrying out the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction from raw substances and materials that ISIS also appears adept at procuring.

The notion that ISIS and its operatives can deploy weapons of mass destruction outside of Syria and Iraq still remains far-fetched, but even if Ahmed is overstating his abilities by a considerable margin, there is no question that the Caliphate had a substantial group of capable scientists, engineers and technicians.

ISIS’ capacity for innovation and the ability to replicate itself elsewhere—that is, engage in transfer of tools and techniques learned abroad for use in Europe, Asia or the Americas—must be taken seriously.

The Islamic State may have lost every last acre of the Caliphate in Iraq and Syria, but it lives on in the the minds of many who would inflict terrible attacks on its enemies, and may yet acquire the means to do so.



####
document number 5: 
US developing bioweapons in secret lab in Georgia: Russia



Russia has called on the United States to explain experiments with biological and chemical weapons in Georgia, with various Russian officials warning Washington that Moscow won’t tolerate such trials near its borders.

Major General Igor Kirillov, Chief of Russia’s Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Protection Troops, revealed during an interview with the state news agency TASS on Thursday that the US was running a secret chemical weapons lab at the Richard Lugar Public Health Research Center, located in the Georgian settlement of Alekseyevka.

"It raises a question - ‘Why such documents are stored at the Lugar Public Health Research Center?’
We expect a clear-cut answer to this question from the Georgian and American sides," Kirillov said.

He said a list of patents showed the US had developed various types of munitions intended for delivering chemical and biological agents.

According to these patents, the munitions had "low destruction cost" and didn’t "need to contact with enemy manpower."

"This corresponds to the concept of ‘non-contact warfare,’ the United States is implementing," he said, referring to the evolving military concept of fighting wars while ensuring minimum physical contact of own forces.

Kirillov said the patents indicated possible plans by the US military to develop specific capsules that could be filled with poisonous, radioactive, narcotic substances as well as with infectious disease pathogens.

"These munitions are not related to the list of conventional armaments and humane tools of warfare, while the publication of this information contradicts international accords on the prohibition of biological weapons," Kirillov added.

The official said the Georgia center was part of a network of such weapons labs the US had established near the borders of Russia and China.

Kirillov went on to accuse the US of testing deadly drugs and highly lethal biological agents on patients at the Lugar Center under the guise of medical research.

In one case, he said, over 70 people lost their lives after they were given the drug Solvadi, manufactured by the US-based Gilead Sciences, in which former US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld is a key shareholder.

"Even during widespread epidemics at in-patient infection clinics, such a large number of lethal cases has never been recorded," the general said.
He said the same medication was approved by Russia and "not a single lethal case was recorded during its clinical testing."

Vladimir Shamanov, the Head of Russia’s State Duma (Lower House of Parliament) Defense Committee, said Moscow was going to take all the necessary political and military steps in response to the experiments.

"We cannot just turn a blind eye, knowing that something, which directly affects security on the southern borders, is happening there.
We will take diplomatic and military measures," he confirmed.

Vladimir Yermakov, Director of the Russian Foreign Ministry’s Non-Proliferation and Arms Control Department, took a similar line, telling reporters that Moscow had already raised the issue with Washington.

"We told [the Americans] that we won’t let your military biologists do something strange on the Russian border," Yermakov said.

ME

Tags



####
document number 6: 
Disinfectant demand from coronavirus concerns challenges specialty chemical supply chain


Many disinfecting wipes use quaternary ammonium compounds such as benzalkonium chloride to kill germs.


With demand for disinfectant wipes and sprays soaring from medical professionals and consumers seeking to protect themselves from the new coronavirus, producers of quaternary ammonium disinfectant compounds are seeing orders spike.
They say their plants are running well, but they are still struggling with the unusually high demand and intermittent problems obtaining raw materials.

Reckitt Benckiser, which makes Lysol wipes, says it faces unprecedented demand for wipes and other disinfectant products and is doing everything it can to produce as much as possible.
Its competitor, Clorox, says it is "working around the clock" to meet the surge.

Quaternary ammonium compounds, the active ingredients in many such products, work against viruses by stripping them of their lipid envelope, leaving them unable to penetrate cells.
Most disinfectants of this type need about 10 minutes of dwell time to fully disinfect hard surfaces.

The main producers of quaternary ammonium compounds in the US are Lonza, Pilot Chemical, and Stepan.
They make quats by reacting tertiary amines with alkyl halides.
The tertiary amines are made from ammonia and alcohols.

Max Lauwiner, head of global operations for Lonza Specialty Ingredients, says the company’s Mapleton, Illinois, plant, where it produces quats, is operating at "full utilization despite intermittent delays in raw material supply due to logistics restrictions, freight capacity, and container availability."

The raw materials affected include fatty alcohols, ethanol, and isopropyl alcohol, as well as benzyl chloride, ethylbenzyl chloride, and methyl chloride.
The supply situations for ethanol and isopropyl alcohol are the most acute, Lauwiner says.

Richard Rehg, vice president of commercial for Pilot, says his company is also managing through the crisis.
"We have not experienced shortages or supply constraints that would keep us from meeting typical demand for our products," he says.
"In fact, there has been a surge in demand, and for some products we are able to ship above normal levels."

Upstream, Valtris, a US maker of benzyl chloride, reports no material shortages or disruption to its operations.
It is also reporting increased demand for its products due to their use in disinfectants and other critical products.

Despite assurances from suppliers, cleaning product companies are feeling the pinch as they attempt to fulfill their own piles of orders.
"I’m hunting constantly for the quats," says Ryan Cotroneo, chief technology officer at the industrial and institutional cleaning product maker UNX Industries, "and really relying on strategic relationships."

A lot of raw materials for quats normally come from overseas, Cotroneo says, but those suppliers aren’t exporting right now, so US firms have had to find domestic replacements.
Companies that make disinfecting wipes also face a shortage of specialized containers and fabric for the products, he adds.

Industry watchers are confident that any supply problems won’t last long.
"The supply chain is resilient and will rebound," says Steve Bennett, head of scientific and regulatory affairs at the Household Commercial Products Association, a trade group.
"But it does take a little bit of time."



####
document number 7: 
Michigan Man Sentenced for Possessing Molotov Cocktails


A 24-year-old Michigan man was sentenced today in federal court for possessing Molotov cocktails.

On March 10 in Minneapolis, United States District Court Judge John Tunheim sentenced Matthew Bradley Depalma to 42 months in prison and three years of supervised release on one count of possession of destructive devices.
Depalma was charged on Aug.
30, 2008, and pleaded guilty on Oct.
21.

According to Depalma’s plea agreement, from Aug.
22 through Aug.
29, he knowingly and intentionally possessed five Molotov cocktails that were not registered to him in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer Record.

According to a Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavit, Depalma became known to the FBI in July 2008, when Depalma attended the CrimeThinc Convergence near Waldo, Wisc.

During that event, Depalma stated his intention to travel to Minnesota to attend the RNC.

He also expressed his desire to "make some bombs" and "blow up" things during the RNC.

The affidavit states that Depalma discussed with a FBI source his desire to make Molotov cocktails, describing in detail the use of ingredients that would make the flammable liquid more viscous so that it would stick to a target and burn longer and hotter than an ordinary gasolinebased Molotov cocktail.

The affidavit states that Depalma went to a Hennepin County Library on Aug.
18 and spent 90 minutes researching recipes for explosive devices.
Depalma produced a handwritten list of items he would need to construct "special" Molotov cocktails that would stick to people and other targets.

Depalma’s conversations, recorded on Aug.
20, described a plan to place a bomb near the Xcel Center during the RNC in an effort to disrupt the convention.
The plan involved entering utility tunnels near the center and using either Molotov cocktails or a chemical bomb to destroy electrical cables and cause a power outage.
Depalma, the affidavit states, also described a related plan to use napalm-filled Molotov cocktails on the streets against police officers.
Specifically, he said, "I will light one of those pigs on fire."

The affidavit states that Depalma obtained supplies for making Molotov cocktails on Aug.
21-22.

On Aug.
22, Depalma manufactured two jugs of a homemade napalm-like substance for use in Molotov cocktails.
He created a flammable gelatin and described to another the proper technique for throwing a Molotov cocktail to obtain the best explosion.
Depalma continued to discuss his desire to make a bomb for use at the Xcel Center on either the convention’s first day (Sept.
1) or last day (Sept.
4).

According to the affidavit, Depalma stated that if he could bomb the center on Sept.
1, they might call off the convention.
He added that a "power outage would say a lot," and that it was his "main purpose."
Depalma also said he would like to bomb the Xcel Energy Center on Sept.
4, so the convention would "end with a bang."

Depalma was observed traveling to a remote location in Rosemount for the purpose of assembling and testing Molotov cocktails.
On Aug.
25, Depalma went to a remote location in Roseville for the purpose of experimenting with chemicals for a chemical bomb.

The affidavit states that Depalma manufactured three additional Molotov cocktails in a Minneapolis apartment on Aug.
28, where he was arrested.
The affidavit also states that Depalma possessed a total of five Molotov cocktails between Aug.
22-28, which were not registered to him in the National Firearms Registration and Transfer Record, as required by law.

This case was the result of an investigation by the FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force, which includes the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
It was prosecuted by Assistant U.S. Attorney W. Anders Folk.



####
document number 8: 
Revisiting Aum Shinrikyo: New Insights into the Most Extensive Non-State Biological Weapons Program to Date


Introduction [1]

Among the chilling details unearthed in the manifesto of Norwegian domestic terrorist Anders Behring Breivik were passages advocating the use of biological weapons and especially

Bacillus anthracis

, the bacterium that causes anthrax.
Most commentators rightly downplayed the issue, since no evidence has emerged that Breivik obtained the bacterium or the capability to produce and disseminate it.
[2] At the same time, Breivik’s manifesto is yet another data point highlighting the appeal that biological weapons generally, and

B. anthracis

in particular, have to extremist groups and individuals seeking to cause mass casualties.

The most extensive non-state biological weapons program unearthed to date was organized in the 1990s by the Japanese Aum Shinrikyo cult.
[3] Together with the 2001 letters containing

B. anthracis

mailed to the media and U.S. Congress, it is one of only two known non-state efforts to try to manufacture and disseminate aerosolized biological weapons or

B. anthracis

.
Especially with so few cases on which to base analysis, Aum provides a key data point for assessing bioterrorism risks.
But while much has been written about the group, most analysis has focused either on its successful chemical weapons attacks or the cult’s bizarre characteristics more generally.
Aum’s failed biological weapons program has received far less attention, presumably in part because of a paucity of information.
[4]

A recent report based on extensive interviews with key cult members, including some imprisoned and on death row in Japan, sheds new light on Aum’s biological weapons-related activities.
The research effort that culminated in the publication of

Aum Shinrikyo: Insights Into How Terrorists Develop Biological and Chemical Weapons

was spearheaded by Richard Danzig, who served as Secretary of the Navy in the Clinton administration, and is a longtime advocate in Washington’s inner sanctums of more robust efforts to counter bioterrorism.
[5] For full disclosure, this author worked on the early stages of the multi-year research effort that culminated in the report, though not the drafting of the final paper.
The following draws on that work generally and the recently released report specifically.

Prior to the Danzig et al.
study, key cult members had apparently never been debriefed in any detail about their biological weapons program.
Japanese authorities were more interested in the chemical weapons program, because it produced casualties, than the biological weapons program that appears to have failed.
It is unclear whether outside analysts had previously tried to gain access to imprisoned cult members, which would have required the cooperation of the Japanese government.

Newly available information about Aum’s biological weapons efforts provides grounds for both comfort and concern.
The group grappled with challenges that will confront many non-state actors that might hope to employ biological weapons.
Yet Aum’s struggles appear to have had as much to do with its often bungling approach as with the inherent challenges of deploying biological weapons, and future groups may navigate these challenges less ineptly.
The ways in which Aum failed, and the trade-offs it confronted, provide lessons for policymakers looking to disrupt the efforts of future non-state actors that aspire to wield biological weapons.

From Yoga, Massage, and Alternative Medicine to Catalyzing the Apocalypse

Aum Shinrikyo began as a peaceful group before gradually morphing into an apocalyptic millenarian cult.
The group evolved from a yoga studio founded in Tokyo in the mid-1980s by Chizuo Matsumoto (who later renamed himself Shoko Asahara), a semi-blind acupuncture, massage, and Chinese medicine practitioner.
[6] Aum drew members stifled by a lack of purpose and spirituality in their lives, an early core of whom became Asahara’s inner circle.

The group grew rapidly; by 1989, it comprised about 4,000 members, and by 1995, when the cult carried out the sarin gas attacks on the Tokyo subway and Asahara and other key cult members were consequently arrested, it had about 10,000 members in Japan.
[7] The cult controlled about two dozen properties in Japan and had foreign offices in the United States, Germany, and Russia.
[8]

As early as 1985, Asahara predicted a coming apocalypse and identified himself and his acolytes as key to averting it.
Over time, this prediction morphed into a belief that the apocalypse was inevitable but cult members alone would survive it, and finally that the cult should hasten the apocalypse by launching attacks, including with biological weapons.
[9]

The group’s descent into violence was gradual.
In late 1988, a follower accidentally drowned during ritual exercises, and fearing attention from authorities Asahara ordered his corpse burned and remains disposed of surreptitiously.
When the deceased’s best friend became disillusioned with the cult and attempted to leave it early the following year, he was killed.
A few months after that, Asahara ordered the killing of a lawyer representing families of cult members, and cult members also killed the lawyer’s wife and one-year-old son.
[10]

One striking aspect of the Aum case is that roughly a dozen members of the inner circle personally carried out various criminal acts, including assassinations and the dissemination of biological and chemical agents.
Cult rank-and-file appear to have assisted, likely often unknowingly, for example by staffing chemical and biological weapons production facilities, but appear not to have been directly involved in carrying out attacks.
For members of the inner circle, crossing lesser thresholds to illegal action and violence appears to have reduced inhibitions to carrying out subsequent, more transgressive acts, and also made it difficult for members to contemplate leaving, since they were criminally implicated.

The trigger for the cult’s shift from apocalypse survival to apocalypse initiation appears to have been its unsuccessful attempt to compete in Japan’s 1990 parliamentary elections, on which it spent millions of dollars but garnered only a token number of votes.
[11] The group’s efforts to develop apocalypse-hastening weapons melded science and science fiction; members were fascinated by futuristic weapons concepts such as plasma guns that could atomize human bodies or mirrors several miles across that would float in space and reflect the sun’s rays.
[12] Several cult members visited the archive of Nicolai Tesla in Serbia to research his writings about earthquake-generating machines.
[13] The cult purchased land in Australia with the intention of prospecting for uranium to build nuclear weapons.
[14] And Aum purchased military hardware from the former Soviet Union, including AK-47 assault rifles, production equipment to manufacture its own versions in Japan, and a surplus MI-17 military transport helicopter, although its procurement efforts—like its later biological weapons efforts—were characterized by short attention spans and short shrift to technical challenges.
[15]

While some of Aum’s efforts are best characterized as science fiction, the cult’s pursuit of chemical and biological weapons was substantially grounded in science.
Chemical weapons were pursued in parallel with and ultimately as a substitute for failed biological weapons efforts.
The cult reportedly manufactured small quantities of phosgene, hydrogen cyanide, soman, GF and VX nerve agents, and attempted to employ some of these in targeted assassinations, consistently without success.
[16] It produced and disseminated larger quantities of sarin, with which it was able to kill and injure on several occasions.
[17] Although Aum apparently dabbled with a variety of biological agents, it only seriously attempted to obtain and disseminate two, botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT), obtained from the bacterium

Clostridium botulinum

, and

B. anthracis

.
The focus of this brief is Aum’s biological weapons efforts, which have received relatively little attention to date and on which the Danzig et al.
study sheds more new light.

Botulinum Neurotoxin: Trying to Deploy the Most Potent Poison

After deciding that the lawyer representing cult members’ families should be killed, Asahara asked his disciples what the most potent poison was, and one replied, "botulinum."
Although not employed to assassinate the lawyer, after the humiliating 1990 electoral defeat Asahara ordered the toxin’s acquisition.
[18]

As with

B. anthracis

, the cult chose not to try to obtain

C. botulinum

from legitimate culture collections, presumably fearing such a mode of acquisition could be traced back to Aum following any attacks.
[19] Instead, cult members gathered soil from an area known to contain the bacterium with the intention of culturing it.
[20] The cult may also have obtained material from a South American culture collection.
[21] One key cult member recalls the group worked with at least five distinct strains of

C. botulinum

, suggesting that some effort was made to isolate

C. botulinum

from the thousands of other bacterial and fungal species a soil sample would contain, though no information sheds light on the methods by which the cult attempted this task.
[22] If no isolation was attempted, that would provide one clear explanation for the apparent abject failure of Aum’s

C. botulinum efforts

, since a soil sample would contain thousands of living bacterial and fungal species that would crowd out any desired

C. botulinum

the samples might have contained.

Cult members cultivated material in two very large, crude, homemade fermenters; whether these were capable of maintaining the anaerobic (oxygen-free) environment or temperatures required is unclear.
No efforts were made to purify the resulting yellow liquid, a mixture of growth media and bacteria.
According to a key cult member, at least some of the product was contaminated with

Bacillus [subtilis] natto

, an aerobic bacterium used in Japan to ferment soybeans, although how the contaminant was identified remains unclear.
[23] Enormous volumes of the yellow liquid were supposedly produced; based on data provided by interviewed cult members Danzig et al.
estimate total production at a remarkable 450 metric tons.
[24]

Given the challenges Aum faced and its crude approach, the cult’s efforts to produce BoNT unsurprisingly appear to have been unsuccessful.
Mice on which the yellow liquid was tested showed no toxic effects, and one cult member reportedly slipped into a fermenting tank and nearly drowned, but subsequently showed no signs of illness.
[25] In early 1990 the cult nonetheless disseminated large volumes of the liquid from trucks fitted with crude spray devices, deploying these in the vicinity of two U.S. Naval bases, the Narita airport, the Japanese Diet, the Imperial Palace, and the headquarters of a rival religious group.
[26] No one appears to have been affected (including cult members who accidentally exposed themselves during the dissemination process), and the efforts went unnoticed by legal authorities.

In fall 1990, three Aum leaders were arrested for fraudulently purchasing land for a new compound; unbeknownst to the police, chemical weapons production facilities were under construction on the new land.
According to a key cult member, the arrests were interpreted as a sign that a police raid was imminent, and Aum responded by dismantling its chemical and biological weapons facilities.
[27] In 1992 the cult reinvigorated its efforts with a new focus on

B. anthracis

, detailed below.
When these efforts failed to produce any casualties, in 1993 the group again attempted to produce BoNT and used small quantities of material it produced to unsuccessfully attack individuals and a subway station.
[28]

A variety of factors may have contributed to the failed BoNT efforts.
Several analysts have speculated that Aum may not have acquired a strain of

C. botulinum

capable of producing significant toxin.
[29] Available information suggests the cult may simply have cultured a soil sample without attempting to isolate

C. botulinum

, which would not have yielded meaningful quantities of toxin even if the sample had contained a toxin-producing strain alongside thousands of other organic contaminants.

Even if the group did acquire and isolate a toxigenic strain, conditions for appropriate anaerobic fermentation may not have been achieved.
Two cult members indicated the presence of bacterial contamination, and this would have interfered with the growth of

C. botulinum

.
[30] It is also possible that some toxin was successfully produced but degraded or destroyed during processing, storage, or dissemination, or that whatever toxin was present was too dilute to have an effect.
The most likely hypothesis remains that the cult failed to obtain or isolate the requisite bacteria.

Bacillus Anthracis: "Genetic Engineering" to Produce Lethality?

In 1992, Aum reinvigorated its biological weapons efforts in the context of more robust militarized interaction with the outside world, the trigger for which seems to have been leader Asahara’s whims rather than any particular external event.
[31] Efforts now focused on

B. anthracis

, the bacterium that causes anthrax.
As with the

C. botulinum

, Aum decided not to try to obtain material from a culture collection for fear the acquisition could be traced.
An unsuccessful effort was apparently made to steal a strain from a laboratory, after which a cult sympathizer provided access to a vaccine strain of the material, although the details remain murky.
[32]

Perhaps the most important puzzle on which the Danzig et al.
report sheds potential light is with its alternative theory about how the cult ended up with a vaccine strain of

B. anthracis

.
The conventional wisdom is that this represented bungling, possibly as simple as a clerical error when ordering material from a culture collection.
Others have suggested that the anthrax dissemination was only intended as a trial run, or that the effort was sabotaged.
[33] Danzig et al.
advance a plausible, if still speculative, alternative explanation.

The cult member in charge of biological weapons efforts had completed undergraduate studies in agricultural and veterinary medicine at a university with a substantial anthrax collection, including both Sterne and Pasteur vaccine strains, before going on to PhD studies in virology.
[34] Danzig et al.
speculate that a contact at his old university provided him with

B. anthracis

, a supposition supported by new analysis of the samples gathered by the Japanese police, which suggest that the cult’s material closely matched the particular strain of Sterne held by the university.
[35]

Two key cult members indicated that Aum members working on the project were aware they had a vaccine strain but planned to use "genetic engineering" to convert it to a more lethal form.
While other analysts have dismissed this as more science fiction than science, Danzig et al.
speculate that the cult may have obtained both Sterne and Pasteur strains and sought to combine them to produce a virulent strain.
[36] It turns out that Russian scientists had published a paper detailing such an effort in 1989, and scientists at the Japanese agricultural and veterinary university had been working on the technique around the same time.
[37] It bears emphasizing that no concrete evidence suggests the cult obtained a Pasteur strain, and even if it had, employing Sterne and Pasteur strains to create a virulent pathogen is a challenging task almost certainly beyond cult members’ capabilities.

As with BoNT, in 1993 the cult began attempting to mass produce

B. anthracis

without evidence that it had successfully obtained a pathogenic strain.
Material was prepared in crude drum fermenters.
No efforts were made to purify the 10-20 metric tons of liquid slurry produced, which was dispersed using a homemade sprayer, first from the roof of a cult building located in a residential neighborhood and later from a modified truck.

In the former case, some birds and neighborhood pets were apparently killed, though whether by the substance released remains unclear.
Neighbors complained of the foul odor and gelatinous substance that rained down in the building’s vicinity, leading the police to visit and gather samples, but these were not tested until after the 1995 sarin subway attacks.
[38] After attacks with liquid slurry failed to produce any casualties, the group began to employ crude drying devices to produce a powder, an unknown quantity of which was disseminated by truck in Tokyo.
[39]

Although some neighborhood birds may have perished, it appears no humans were harmed as a result of Aum’s

B. anthracis

efforts.
In fact, multiple cult members apparently inadvertently inhaled the material produced and subsequently reported no ill effects.
[40] As with BoNT, a variety of factors appear to explain Aum’s lack of success.
If the cult was indeed attempting to produce a virulent strain of B. anthracis using two vaccine strains, this remarkably ambitious effort unsurprisingly failed.
Even in the unlikely event that the effort had been successful, the resulting strain might not have been sufficiently robust for subsequent production, storage, and dissemination.
In the even more unlikely event that Aum had produced and successfully stored volumes of a virulent strain, it is possible that poor dissemination capabilities might have damaged the material or failed to aerosolize it so that sufficient quantities could be inhaled.
For example, the cult employed a homemade nozzle that reportedly spouted rather than sprayed and dispersed material during the day, exposing it to UV radiation and thermal updrafts that would have reduced concentrations at ground level.
[41] But the most plausible hypothesis remains that Aum failed to obtain a virulent strain of

B. anthracis

.

Learning from Aum’s Failed Efforts

Especially in light of the paucity of bioterrorism cases, Aum’s failed efforts to deploy effective biological weapons are a rich data point for assessing the threat and identifying policies to ameliorate it.
Every case has its idiosyncrasies, and perhaps none quite so much as Aum, which really was "stranger than fiction."
But with that caveat in mind, the case does suggest three generalizations about the bioterrorism threat.

Putting the bioterrorism threat in perspective

Cult leader Asahara took a key lesson from his acolytes’ repeated failures to mount an effective biological weapons attack: American hyping of the bioterrorism threat was intended to mislead groups like his into pursuing this unproductive path in lieu of other, potentially more effective weapons.
[42] Although to this observer it appears unlikely Washington’s public diplomacy efforts are quite so crafty (at least not intentionally so), Aum’s struggles do suggest that successful bioterrorism is more challenging than it is often portrayed.

Generalizations from one case should be taken with a grain of salt, all the more so when the case is as idiosyncratic as this one.
But the cult brought to bear both some degree of relevant expertise and very substantial resources.
The head of the biological weapons program had completed undergraduate studies in agricultural and veterinary medicine and conducted PhD studies in virology, albeit was not a microbiologist and lacked tacit knowledge regarding working with bacteria.
[43] Another senior member was a medical doctor.
As for resources, the cult possessed and was willing to spend millions of dollars on its unconventional weapons programs and constructed substantial infrastructure to support it.

The Aum case particularly highlights the importance of specialized, tacit knowledge to be able to isolate, manipulate, cultivate, and sustain living organisms, somewhat in contrast to chemical weapons development efforts.
[44] The cult’s failure to successfully deploy biological weapons appears to be over determined.
Whatever the causes of its failures—and these remain somewhat ambiguous—it appears that plenty of others stood between the cult and a successful bioterrorism attack.
For example, the cult appears to have failed to obtain a pathogenic strain of

B. anthracis

or a toxigenic strain of

C. botulinum

.
But had it succeeded, it appears likely the cult would have struggled to cultivate those strains.
Had it overcome that hurdle, cult members would almost certainly have exposed themselves during the production and dissemination process.
Had they avoided those hurdles, Aum’s crude production and dissemination techniques would have meant that few if any non-cult members would have been sickened by the crudely disseminated slurry, even if it had contained BoNT or a virulent strain of

B. anthracis

.

Effective dispersal is a significant hurdle

Discussions of bioterrorism tend to focus on the possibility that individuals or groups might obtain agents they could use to conduct attacks, but often give short shrift to how readily such agents could be disseminated if they were obtained.
The evidence suggests that Aum likely failed to obtain potent agents, and that its struggles to distribute what it did obtain effectively are therefore not necessary to explaining its failure to cause harm via biological weapons.

Nonetheless, Aum’s struggles to effectively disseminate the material it produced highlight an important finding.
Obtaining agents is likely the greatest hurdle to successful bioterrorism, but disseminating them to cause large numbers of casualties, and simultaneously avoiding exposure of those doing the disseminating, is a non-trivial secondary challenge that popular discussions of bioterrorism often overlook.

Where there is smoke, there may later be fire

Aum’s efforts were characterized by steadily escalating levels of attempted violence, a relatively seamless transition from individual to mass attacks, and from conventional to unconventional weapons, and a trial-and-error process of repeated errors but persistence and attempts at correction in the face of failure.

Like other non-state groups, Aum engaged in steadily escalating levels of illegal action and violence.
The group began with the illegal disposal of the body of a cult member who had been accidentally killed and escalated to attacks on individuals perceived to be antagonistic to the cult and ultimately the general populace.
Initial transgressions appear to have cemented group affiliation, emboldened cult members and especially the leader Asahara, and made it difficult for members to back out as violence escalated.

One striking element of the case is the relatively seamless transition from individual to mass attacks, and from more to less conventional ones, (i.e., from killing a lapsed cult member by strangling him with a rope to attempting to expose large populations to BoNT and

B. anthracis

).
Normative inhibitions appear to have played little role, although it is hard to know how far that can be generalized beyond the case.

Relatedly, the cult was not dissuaded by repeated failures, and it was emboldened at the lack of consequences for its earlier actions.
This suggests that where there is smoke there may be fire, in other words, failed attacks may be harbingers of future, and potentially more successful, ones.
The pattern of trial, error, and potential later success also provides support for a "broken windows" theory of counterterrorism: responding robustly to more modest initial transgressions may make subsequent greater transgressions less likely.
[45]

Sources: [1] Philipp C.
Bleek is assistant professor of Nonproliferation and Terrorism Studies in the Graduate School of International Policy and Management at the Monterey Institute of International Studies, a Graduate School of Middlebury College, and fellow at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies.
He thanks Richard Danzig, Jessica Varnum, and Ray Zilinskas for helpful comments on earlier drafts.
[2] One striking thing about Breivik’s manifesto is the sobriety of its analysis of anthrax, especially given the author’s apparent lack of relevant expertise.
However, since much of the manuscript was plagiarized from various sources, whether Breivik deserves much credit for the analysis is debatable.
"Theoretically," the manifesto says (in this case channeling Wikipedia), "anthrax spores can be cultivated with minimal special equipment and less than a first-year collegiate microbiological education."
But in practice, the document notes, the procedure "is difficult and dangerous."
Andrew Berwick (pseudonym),

2083: A European Declaration of Independence

(self-published, 2011), accessed November 4, 2011 at https://www.kevinislaughter.com/wp-content/uploads/2083+-+A+European+Declaration+of+Independence.pdf, pp.
952-954, 957, 959, 961-965.
[3] As William Rosenau notes, "Aum is the only example of a terrorist group that has attempted to carry out mass murder with biological toxins and human pathogens.
Other terrorists have attempted to acquire human pathogens, and one religious cult has succeeded in poisoning food with dangerous bacteria.
But to date only Aum has attempted to create and use bioweapons on a large scale.
In short, Aum is an important source of empirical information on sophisticated terrorist efforts to acquire these weapons."
William Rosenau, "Aum Shinrikyo’s Biological Weapons Program: Why Did It Fail?"

Studies in Conflict and Terrorism

Volume 24, Number 4 (2001), p.
290.
[4] John Parachini wrote in 2005, "Aum’s research about biological weapons remains remarkably obscure in official, journalistic, and scholarly accounts…These activities warrant considerably more thorough examination than they have received thus far."
John Parachini, "Aum Shinrikyo," in Brian Jackson et al.,

Aptitude for Destruction, Volume 2: Case Studies of Organizational Learning in Five Terrorist Groups

(Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2005), p.
19.
[5] Richard Danzig et al.,

Aum Shinrikyo: Insights Into How Terrorists Develop Biological and Chemical Weapons

(Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, 2011).
Danzig’s prior work on the topic includes Richard J.
Danzig, Rachel Kleinfeld, and Philipp C.
Bleek, After an Attack: Preparing Citizens for Bioterrorism (Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, 2007); Richard J.
Danzig, A Policymaker’s Guide to Bioterrorism and What to Do About It (Washington, DC: National Defense University, 2009); Richard Danzig, Catastrophic Bioterrorism: What Is To Be Done?
(Washington, DC: National Defense University, 2003).
Subsequent references to "Danzig et al."
refer to the Aum Shinrikyo report.
[6] Aum appears to refer to the "ohm" sound yoga practitioners make; Asahara (then Matsumoto) called his yoga school Aum, Inc.
Shinrikyo means teaching of truth.
An earlier iteration of the group was called Aum Shinsen no Kai, or Aum Mountain Hermit’s Society, based on a prophecy that survivors of the coming apocalypse would be benevolent

shinsen

, or mountain hermits.
Ian Reader,

Religious Violence in Contemporary Japan: The Case of Aum Shinrikyo

(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2000), p.
89.
[7] Reader, pp.
63, 92.
Only a modest fraction of these were "monks" or "nuns" who had fully rejected all ties to the outside world.
The group also attempted to open branches in Germany, the United States, and Sri Lanka, and was apparently most successful in Russia, where it attracted approximately tens of thousands of followers after Asahara visited the country with several hundred Japanese members on a "Salvation Tour," including "spectacular" events and considerable radio and television advertising.
Parachini, pp.
29-31.
[8] Appendix C: Aum Shinrikyo Facilities in

Global Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Case Study on the Aum Shinrikyo

Senate Government Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, October 31, 1995, accessed November 4, 2011 at www.fas.org/irp/congress/1995_rpt/aum/index.html.
[9] Reader, pp.
88-93.
Although the cult’s often-inept violence attracted police attention, a combination of equally-inept policing and strict laws protecting religious organizations allowed it to act with relative impunity.
[10] Reader pp.
143-145, 148-151; Danzig et al., pp.
9, 12, 14.
[11] Reader, pp.
148, 153-158.
[12] Reader, p.
180.
[13] Robert Jay Lifton,

Destroying the World to Save It: Aum Shinrikyo, Apocalytic Violence, and the New Global Terrorism

(New York: Metropolitan Books, 1999), pp.
119-120.
One can imagine the elderly archivist’s bafflement at the strange Japanese visitors who spent day after day digging through the archives for earthquake generation-related material.
[14] Parachini, p. 23 [15] Parachini, p. 26; Reader, p. 217; Lifton, p.
181.
[16] Danzig et al., p.
29.
[17] The Danzig et al.
study also includes a rich account of Aum’s chemical weapons efforts with some new details about the cult’s activities, including the most thorough discussion of the cult’s crude but effective sarin dissemination techniques published to date.
[18] Danzig et al., p.
16.
[19] Since the cult operated a hospital, it could plausibly have obtained the bacterium from a commercial culture collection.
[20] What was gathered remains unclear, but a key cult member told Danzig et al.
that the cult worked on at least five strains or variants of C. butulinum, although some material may later have been obtained from a South American culture collection.
How the cult isolated and identified the strains on which it supposedly worked remains unclear.
Danzig et al., p.
16.
[21] The Danzig et al.
study notes this possibility but does not attribute it to a source; see endnote 68, p.
54.
[22] Danzig et al, p.
16.
[23] Danzig et al., p.
17.
[24] A key cult member described to Danzig et al.
two or three cube-shaped steel boxes, with dimensions of 2 x 2 x 2.5 meters, used as fermenters, and approximately 50 batches of yellow liquid produced.
The total volume supposedly produced would be sufficient to fill dozens of full-size fertilizer transport trucks, suggesting that perhaps the cult member’s recollections should be taken with a grain of salt.
That said, Aum had both very substantial financial resources (a study by the U.S. Senate Government Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations estimated Aum’s total resources in 1995 at more than $1 billion), and the land and manpower for substantial facilities.

Global Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Case Study on the Aum Shinrikyo

, Senate Government Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, October 31, 1995, accessed November 4, 2011 at www.fas.org/irp/congress/1995_rpt/aum/index.html.
[25] Mice were apparently injected with the yellow liquid; whether ingestion and aerosol inhalation were also employed is unclear.
There appears to have been some uncertainty about whether some mice were affected; some did die, but it was unclear whether this was linked to the administration of the botulinum.
Danzig, p. 16 and endnote 76, pp.
54-55.
[26] Danzig et al., p.
17.
[27] Danzig et al., pp.
17, 20.
[28] Danzig et al., p.
21.
[29] W. Seth Carus,

Bioterrorism and Biocrimes: The Illicit Use of Biological Agents Since 1990

(National Defense University, 2002), p. 50; Gregory D. Koblentz,

Living Weapons: Biological Warfare and International Security

(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), p. 213; Milton Leitenberg,

Assessing the Biological Weapons and Bioterrorism Threat

(U.S. Army War College, 2005), p.
60.
[30] Danzig et al., p.
17.
[31] Danzig et al, pp.
20-21.
[32] Some of the uncertainty stems from the fact that the individual in charge of the cult’s biological weapons efforts declined interview requests from Danzig et al., and other key cult members disclaim knowledge of his bacillus anthracis source(s).
Danzig et al., pp.
21, 23.
[33] Parachini, p.
21.
[34] Unfortunately, the cult member in charge of the biological weapons program declined to meet with Danzig and his colleagues.
[35] Paul Keim, who with colleagues had analyzed a sample from Aum’s 1993 attempted

B. anthracis

attack and identified it as a benign Sterne vaccine strain, conducted further analysis in 2010 in response to a request from Danzig et al.
and determined that, "The genome sequence was extremely similar not just to Sterne but specifically to the 34F2 strain then available at Obihiro," the university where the cult member in charge of the biological weapons program had conducted his undergraduate studies.
Danzig et al., p.
23.
[36] Virulent

B. anthracis

possesses two plasmids, while the Sterne and Pasteur strains each possess only one of the two and can consequently stimulate immune reactions without being lethal.
The two strains can be employed to yield virulent bacteria via either cell-to-cell "mating" (conjugation), or the use of a virus that infects bacteria (transduction).
The technique is challenging and likely beyond the abilities of Aum’s members, but Danzig et al.
’s speculation that it was being attempted finds considerable support from the accounts of cult members and other information.
Danzig et al, pp.
23-25.
[37] The speculation is further reinforced by the recollection of one key cult member that a microscope was used to confirm success in transforming the vaccine strain to a more virulent one.
The second plasmid found on a virulent anthrax strain generates a capsule that can be viewed after staining under a light microscope.
Danzig et al, p.
24.
The Russian paper cited is A.S. Stepanov, "Transduction and Conjugation Transfer of the pX02 Plasmid in

Bacillus anthracis

"

Molekuliarnaia Genetika, Mikrobiologia, I Virusologia

12 (1989), pp.
39-43.
[38] Raymond A. Zilinskas, Biological Warfare: Modern Offense and Defense (Lynne Rienner, 2000), p. 81; Lifton, p. 188; Danzig, p.
25.
[39] Danzig et al., p.
25.
[40] Danzig et al., p.
25.
[41] Gregory D. Koblentz,

Living Weapons: Biological Warfare and International Security

(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), p.
213.
[42] Danzig et al., p. 26, based on Danzig interview with Fumihiro Joyu, April 21, 2008.
One can imagine Al Qaeda operatives similarly grumbling about chemical, biological, and especially nuclear terrorism risk assessments; the online humor magazine

The Onion

nicely captured that scenario in a story headlined "Terrorist Has No Idea What To Do With All This Plutonium" a few years ago.
November 30, 2005, accessed October 2, 2011 at www.theonion.com/articles/terrorist-has-no-idea-what-to-do-with-all-this-plu,1847/.
[43] Tacit knowledge is knowledge that cannot be conveyed in words or symbols, but must be learned by doing, often through a process of trial-and-error.
A paradigmatic example is learning to write a bicycle; a textbook on bicycle-riding would presumably be of little use to mastering the core skill of balancing while operating the bicycle.
[44] Successfully mounting a

B. anthracis

attack requires skills associated with obtaining, growing, processing, sporulating, drying, pulverizing, testing, and disseminating, posing major challenges even for those trained as, for example, medical doctors or veterinarians.
[45] The "broken windows" strategy of policing was first articulated by James Q.
Wilson and George L. Kelling in a 1982 article in the

Atlantic Monthly

, in which they suggested that not fixing broken windows would encourage greater transgressions.
The approach was famously implemented in New York in the early 1990s, first by the head of the city’s Transit Police, William Bratton, and then by Major Rudy Giuliani and his police commissioner, Howard Safir.
As implemented in New York, one notable example of "broken windows" were the "squeegee men" who cleaned car windshields at intersections and then demanded payment.
James Q.
Wilson and George L. Kelling, "Broken Windows: The Police and Neighborhood Safety"

The Atlantic Magazine

(March 1982), accessed November 4, 2011 at https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/4465/.

In light of newly available information, Philipp Bleek analyzes Aum Shinrikyo's biological weapons efforts and uses the cult's failed attempts as a tool to assess the threat of bioterrorism and possible preventative measures.



####
document number 9: 
Converting Plastic Waste From Cities and Rivers Into Fuel


An image of one of Renewlogy’s conversion machines.
Plastics entering Renewlogy’s system are first shredded, then put through a chemical reformer, where a catalyst degrades their long carbon chains.
Roughly 15 to 20 percent of those chains are converted into hydrocarbon gas that Renewlogy recycles to heat the system.
Five percent turns into char, and the remaining 75 percent is converted into high-value fuels.
Credit: Renewlogy


MIT alumna addresses the world’s mounting plastic waste problem.


It’s been nearly 10 years since Priyanka Bakaya MBA ’11 founded Renewlogy to develop a system that converts plastic waste into fuel.
Today, that system is being used to profitably turn even nonrecyclable plastic into high-value fuels like diesel, as well as the precursors to new plastics.

Since its inception, Bakaya has guided Renewlogy through multiple business and product transformations to maximize its impact.
During the company’s evolution from a garage-based startup to a global driver of sustainability, it has licensed its technology to waste management companies in the U.S. and Canada, created community-driven supply chains for processing nonrecycled plastic, and started a nonprofit, Renew Oceans, to reduce the flow of plastic into the world’s oceans.

The latter project has brought Bakaya and her team to one of the most polluted rivers in the world, the Ganges.
With an effort based in Varanasi, a city of much religious, political, and cultural significance in India, Renew Oceans hopes to transform the river basin by incentivizing residents to dispose of omnipresent plastic waste in its "reverse vending machines," which provide coupons in exchange for certain plastics.

Each of Renewlogy’s initiatives has brought challenges Bakaya never could have imagined during her early days tinkering with the system.
But she’s approached those hurdles with a creative determination, driven by her belief in the transformative power of the company.

"It’s important to focus on big problems you’re really passionate about," Bakaya says.
"The only reason we’ve stuck with it over the years is because it’s extremely meaningful, and I couldn’t imagine working this hard and long on something if it wasn’t deeply meaningful."

A system for sustainability


Bakaya began working on a plastic-conversion system with Renewlogy co-founder and Chief Technology Officer Benjamin Coates after coming to MIT’s Sloan School of Management in 2009.
While pursuing his PhD at the University of Utah, Coates had been developing continuously operating systems to create fuels from things like wood waste and algae conversion.

One of Renewlogy’s key innovations is using a continuous system on plastics, which saves energy by eliminating the need to reheat the system to the high temperatures necessary for conversion.

Today, plastics entering Renewlogy’s system are first shredded, then put through a chemical reformer, where a catalyst degrades their long carbon chains.

Renewlogy co-founder and CEO Priyanka Bakaya inside one of the company’s commercial plants, which are capable of processing ten tons of plastic each day to create about 60 barrels of fuel.
Credit: Renewlogy


Roughly 15 to 20 percent of those chains are converted into hydrocarbon gas that Renewlogy recycles to heat the system.
Five percent turns into char, and the remaining 75 percent is converted into high-value fuels.
Bakaya says the system can create about 60 barrels of fuel for every 10 tons of plastic it processes, and it has a 75 percent lower carbon footprint when compared to traditional methods for extracting and distilling diesel fuel.

In 2014, the company began running a large-scale plant in Salt Lake City, where it continues to iterate its processes and hold demonstrations.

Since then, Renewlogy has set up another commercial-scale facility in Nova Scotia, Canada, where the waste management company Sustane uses it to process about 10 tons of plastic a day, representing 5 percent of the total amount of solid waste the company collects.
Renewlogy is also building a similar-sized facility in Phoenix, Arizona, that will be breaking ground next year.
That project focuses on processing specific types of plastics (identified by international resin codes 3 through 7) that are less easily recycled.

In addition to its licensing strategy, the company is spearheading grassroots efforts to gather and process plastic that’s not normally collected for recycling, as part of the Hefty Energy Bag Program.

Through the program, residents in cities including Boise, Idaho, Omaha, Nebraska, and Lincoln, Nebraska, can put plastics numbered 4 through 6 into their regular recycling bins using special orange bags.
The bags are separated at the recycling facility and sent to Renewlogy’s Salt Lake City plant for processing.

The projects have positioned Renewlogy to continue scaling and have earned Bakaya entrepreneurial honors from the likes of

Forbes

,

Fortune

, and the World Economic Forum.
But a growing crisis in the world’s oceans has drawn her halfway across the world, to the site of the company’s most ambitious project yet.

Renewing the planet’s oceans


Of the millions of tons of plastic waste flowing through rivers into the world’s oceans each year, roughly 90 percent comes from just 10 rivers.
The worsening environmental conditions of these rivers represents a growing global crisis that state governments have put billions of dollars toward, often with discouraging results.

Bakaya believes she can help.

"Most of these plastics tend to be what are referred to as soft plastics, which are typically much more challenging to recycle, but are a good feedstock for Renewlogy’s process," she says.

Bakaya started Renew Oceans as a separate, nonprofit arm of Renewlogy last year.
Since then, Renew Oceans has designed fence-like structures to collect river waste that can then be brought to its scaled down machines for processing.
These machines can process between 0.1 and 1 ton of plastic a day.

Renew Oceans has already built its first machine, and Bakaya says deciding where to put it was easy.

From its origins in the Himalayas, the Ganges River flows over 1,500 miles through India and Bangladesh, serving as a means of transportation, irrigation, energy, and as a sacred monument to millions of people who refer to it as Mother Ganges.

Renewlogy’s first machine is currently undergoing local commissioning in the Indian city of Varanasi.
Bakaya says the project is designed to scale.

"The aim is to take this to other major polluted rivers where we can have maximum impact," Bakaya says.
"We’ve started with the Ganges, but we want to go to other regions, especially around Asia, and find circular economies that can support this in the long term so locals can derive value from these plastics."

Scaling down their system was another unforeseen project for Bakaya and Coates, who remember scaling up prototypes during the early days of the company.
Throughout the years, Renewlogy has also adjusted its chemical processes in response to changing markets, having begun by producing crude oil, then moving to diesel as oil prices plummeted, and now exploring ways to create high-value petrochemicals like naphtha, which can be used to make new plastics.

Indeed, the company’s approach has featured almost as many twists and turns as the Ganges itself.
Bakaya says she wouldn’t have it any other way.

"I’d really encourage entrepreneurs to not just go down that easy road but to really challenge themselves and try to solve big problems — especially students from MIT.
The world is kind of depending on MIT students to push us forward and challenge the realm of possibility.
We all should feel that sense of responsibility to solve bigger problems."



####
document number 10: 
How do you invite someone to join Rotary?
Just ask


thanks for the great work u always do.


i really like to join you rootrians


am in uganda kampala part of africa hope to be part of you in all your activities


I speak at Rotary meetings and "Thank" them for all they are doing to eradicate polio.
I am not a Rotarian yet.
But I sure do think about it a lot.
I am a polio survivor and they are helping so many in so many ways.
Keep up the great work.
And of course another "Thanks".


Often it is as simple as asking but I have found that educating them a bit on what Rotary does helps to warm them up because the generation we are wanting to attract will join "your cause", long before they will join Rotary.
So we need to ensure our meetings are welcoming and informative with hands-on action opportunities for service.
These young professional want to do more than just come to dinner meetings.


We are having joint clubs meetin Monday 14th.
I invited six (6) friends: 3 business colleagues, joutnaliste, LAS magazine editor(League of Arab States), managing director of industrial chemical company.
Meeting: Iftar(breakfast in Islamic month of fasting) joint rotary clubs meeting in cairo Egypt.
They’ll see for themselves what we do why we meet the fellowship we enjoy together and ; more importantly ask to come again in our projects’ launch, August 2014.
I know for sure that three if them are ‘ripe’ enough for a next meeting.



####
document number 11: 
Canadian company recycles minerals from electric vehicle batteries


'There's opportunity there to reuse those materials, make them as good as new.'


(Image credit: Li-Cycle Corp.
video)



As electric vehicles become more mainstream, the demand for lithium ion car batteries is growing.
But to increase production, the industry needs more lithium, cobalt, and nickel.

One possible source is batteries that are no longer in use.

"It’s a bit of a waste to just have batteries sitting in a landfill.
And there’s opportunity there to reuse those materials, make them as good as new," says Kunal Phalpher of Li-Cycle.

Li-Cycle uses a two-step process to recover more than 80% of the materials in old lithium ion batteries.

"We take the batteries and shred them," Phalpher says.
"And then phase two of the process is then to take that mixed material and separate each of the elements through chemical processing."

The approach generates less carbon pollution than mining those minerals from the ground.
And it solves another problem the booming industry is grappling with: how to safely and sustainably dispose of spent batteries.

Li-Cycle has a demonstration plant in Canada, and Phalpher says it’s building a new facility in Rochester, New York.
Last December, the company shipped its first commercial load of recycled battery material to a customer – a critical milestone on the road to addressing this global challenge.

Reporting credit: ChavoBart Digital Media.



####
document number 12: 
To save money, Pennsylvania farmer puts his pigs to work


His inventions also cut carbon pollution.




When Homer Walden and Dru Peters started their Pennsylvania farm, the husband and wife team was on a tight budget.

Walden: "We spent all our money on purchasing our farm."

But Walden loves to tinker.

Walden: "That’s my specialty … you know, I’m constantly looking at what we do day-in and day-out and trying to keep the cost down."

So he developed inexpensive ways to do some of his farm chores.

For example, he built portable pig pens that he can pull over a new patch of land every day.
The pigs eat weeds and churn up the ground underneath.

Walden: "Pig tiller, is what I call it.
I also call it pulled pork."

After the pigs, Walden puts chickens on the land.
They eat bugs and enrich the soil with their waste.

So when it’s time to clear a patch of land for planting, Walden does not need a tractor or chemical fertilizers.

His methods are cheap – and reduce carbon pollution.
In 2012 …

Walden: "We were given the governor’s award for environmental excellence by not using a drop of fossil fuels."

Walden is now teaching others about his low-tech, low-carbon farming methods.

Walden: "I don’t think we can help anybody just by considering our own benefits from these ideas, and it’s my quest to share what I’ve learned."

Reporting credit: Sarah Kennedy/ChavoBart Digital Media.



####
document number 13: 
New coveralls chosen to help ensure worker safety in Turkey copper mining operation


DuPont has announced details of the widespread use of its Tyvek

®

brand coveralls at the Eti Bakir AS Küreplant in Turkey – the biggest underground copper mine in the country.

The Küre plant is a mechanised underground metal-mining operation that produces 1.45 million tpy of raw copper ore, 170 000 tpy of copper concentrate and 400 000 tpy of pyrite concentrate.
The Küre mine is an underground system that runs 960 m below the surface and has up to 40 km-long tunnels.
These extensive tunnels see workers carrying out their tasks alongside the operation of heavy mining equipment.

To help ensure occupational safety for its workers, Eti Bakir choses DuPont™ Tyvek

®

500 HV coverall.
"Eti Bakirhas made health and safety its number one priority and has always quickly adopted the latest solutions in regard of its workers’ health, safety and comfort," said Kazim Küçükates, Design and Underground Mine Manager at EtiBakir AS, "the Küre plant is a heavily mechanised one, we can have as many as 80 pieces of mining equipment in operation at any one time and this level of mechanisation means that the high visibility of workers is absolutely crucial."

Küçükates continued: "The use of fluorescent fabrics and highly reflective tapes in our underground workwear is vital, and thanks to the Tyvek

®

500 HV coverall from DuPont, which we have been using for the past three years, we have ensured that our workers have extremely high visibility and can be easily spotted by machine operators.
In addition, the use of disposable coveralls offers significant price advantage as they are more affordable than normal coveralls in oily, dirty and chemical environments."

You might also like



Embed article link: (copy the HTML code below):

New coveralls chosen to help ensure worker safety in Turkey copper mining operation



####
document number 14: 
India, China to resolve border dispute ‘peacefully’


China and India says they have agreed to "peacefully resolve" their border dispute.
(Shutterstock image)



Current Standoff confined to 5 areas of traditional differences for years




NEW DELHI: In a significant attempt to defuse escalating tensions along the border, both New Delhi and Beijing have agreed to "peacefully resolve" the dispute between the world’s two most populous nations, India’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement released on Sunday.

"Both sides agreed to peacefully resolve the situation in the border areas in accordance with various bilateral agreements," excerpts from the statement said.

The agreement comes a day after military officials from the two nations held high-level talks near the eastern part of the Himalayan region of Ladakh.
This disputed border area was the center of the current escalation between the two neighbors.

The talks on Saturday, at the behest of India, were held at the Border Personnel Meeting Point in Maldo on the Chinese side of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in Eastern Ladakh.

"This year marked the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries, and both sides agreed that an early resolution would contribute to the further development of that relationship," Indian officials said.

The issue began early last month when Indian troops blamed China’s military for hindering usual patrolling at the LAC, along the Ladakh and Sikkim border.

Beijing blamed its southern neighbor for building road infrastructure at the Fingers region around the Pangong Tso Lake and Galwan Valley in eastern Ladakh.

Map showing the volatile borders of China, India and Pakistan.
(Shutterstock image)


The present standoff, which began with border skirmishes, is confined to those five key areas where India and China have had traditional differences on the perception of the LAC in the Ladakh region.

Both sides adopted a firm approach and, according to media reports, China deployed nearly 2,500 extra troops in the region, in addition to enhancing its weaponry and military infrastructure.

On Tuesday, India’s Minister of Defense Rajnath Singh hinted at the build-up of Indian troops in the disputed area, too.

"It is true that people of China are on the border.
They claim that it is their territory.
We claim that it is ours.
There has been a disagreement over it.
A sizeable number of Chinese people have come there.
India has done what it needed to do," Singh said in a media interaction on Tuesday.

However, on Sunday, India said that the "two sides would continue military and diplomatic engagements to resolve the situation and to ensure peace and tranquility in the border areas."

Foreign policy experts, for their part, said that the de-escalation and resolution of disputes were "important to maintain a good bilateral relationship."

"If we don’t address the contentious issue it will spill over and impact other bilateral and multilateral relationships," Professor Srikanth Kondapalli of the New Delhi-based Jawaharlal University told Arab News.

He reasoned that the stand-off in Ladakh is related to the "conflicting claims on sovereignty and each country’s distinct strategic vision."

"If China occupies the region, it can connect to Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Central Asia and influence the future setup in Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir," he said, adding that "Ladakh holds geostrategic importance for India" also.

"This region is the highest region on earth, and those who control the peak control the valley.
That is another strategic reason for the dispute."

Manoj Kewalramani, a fellow at the Bangalore-based think-tank Takshashila Institution, added that Saturday’s agreement does not mean a "de-escalation or disengagement anytime soon" or the cessation of dispute.

"The nature of the boundary dispute, the ambiguity surrounding claims and the strategic dynamic of the India-China relationship imply that we should continue to expect incidents and volatility," Kewalramani told Arab News.

He added that what was necessary at this juncture was for both sides "to recognize this."

"They have been working on mechanisms of engagement to maintain stability.
The current situation has tactical and strategic components to it.
The tactical component is related to infrastructure development and force posturing.
The strategic component is related to geopolitical shifts amid the pandemic, which entail worsening Sino-US ties and Beijing’s desire to shore up its periphery," he said.

Other experts believe China escalated tensions along the border for other reasons.

"We have to understand the timing of the incident.
The border infrastructure has been going on for some time.
Judging by the way China reacted this time, it was clear that they wanted to divert the attention away from the mess of the pandemic, their stand on Hong Kong sovereignty and their military posturing in the South China Sea," Jagannath P.
Panda of the Institute of Defense Studies and Analysis, a New Delhi-based think tank, told Arab News.

"The Chinese wanted to send a message to the whole world that they are a competent power and can handle multiple issues at one go," he added.



World


World




####
document number 15: 
Riots in Greece : the best photos


The 2010–2012 Greek protests are a series of demonstrations and general strikes taking place across Greece.
The protests, which began on 5 May 2010, were sparked by plans to cut public spending and raise taxes asausterity measures in exchange for a €110 billion bail-out, aimed at solving the 2010–2011 Greek debt crisis.
Three people were killed in the 5 May protests, one of the largest in Greece since 1973.
On 25 May 2011, anti-austerity protestors organized by the Direct Democracy Now!
movement, known as theIndignant Citizens Movement, started demonstrating in major cities across Greece.
This second wave of demonstrations proved different from the years before in that they are not partisan and began through peaceful means.
Some of the protests later turned violent, particularly in the capital city of Athens.
Sparked by the 2011 Spanish Protests, these demonstrations were organized entirely using social networking sites, which earned it the nickname "May of Facebook".
The demonstrations and square sit-ins were officially ended when municipal police removed demonstrators from Thessaloniki's White Tower square on 7 August 2011.
On 29 June 2011, violent clashes occurred between the riot police and protesters as the Greek parliament voted to accept the EU's austerity requirements.
Accusations of police brutality were reported by international media such as the BBC, The Guardian, CNN iReport and the New York Times as well as Amnesty International.
The Athens Prosecutor agreed to an investigation into accusations of excessive use of tear gas, as well as the alleged use of other expired and carcinogenic chemical substances.
The investigation is currently under way.

Source : Wikipedia

All photography below are copyrighted by their authors – Click on photos to see each license.
Thumbnail photography is under CC Licence by Sotiris Farmakidis

#1


By Andreas Tsam

#2


By makisraf

#3


By Bamako Brad

#4


By mkhalili

#5


By Timos L

#6


By Iason Hatzitheodorou

#7


By Yiannis Kourtoglou

#8


By wisepig

#9


By alexandros_M

#10


By Noumenorian

comments



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = coup
document number 1: 
Gabon's Republican Guard uses Aravis vehicles in counter-coup operation


by Erwan de Cherisey

Gabon’s Republican Guard (GR) deployed Nexter Aravis mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicles (MRAPs) – a type it was not previously known to operate – during the operation to suppress a coup attempt in Libreville on 7 January.

Soldiers and vehicles – including an Aravis in the background – from the Republican Guard are seen outside the Radio Télévision Gabonaise building in Libreville on 7 January.
(Steve Jordan/AFP/Getty Images)


Led by a lieutenant, the coup plotters claimed to be part of a hitherto unknown organisation called the Patriotic Movement of the Defence and Security Forces Youth.
They took control of the headquarters of the national broadcaster Radio Télévision Gabonaise (RTG) early on 7 January and released a message announcing the establishment of a national restoration council to carry out a democratic transition.

By 1030 h local time the government claimed to have the situation under control after the Gabonese Gendarmerie Intervention Group (GIGN) assaulted the RTG building, killing two of the coup plotters and capturing most of the others; one escaped, but was captured in the afternoon.

Meanwhile, the GR, an elite component of the Gabonese Armed Forces primarily tasked with protecting President Ali Bongo and his family, deployed to secure strategic points in Libreville.

At least two GR Aravis MRAPs armed with ARX 20 remotely operated weapon stations were seen on the streets of Libreville in videos and photographs.
Other vehicles deployed included at least two Arquus Bastions, and two VBLs.

Nexter announced in October 2014 that Gabon had ordered 12 Aravis that would be armed with its ARX 20 to equip the battalion it would contribute to the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).



####
document number 2: 
Sudan's President Bashir forced out in military coup



(CNN)After three decades of rule, Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir has been arrested and forced from power in a military coup.

Bashir's government has been dissolved, and a military council has assumed control for two years to oversee a transition of power, Sudanese Defense Minister Awad Mohamed Ahmed Ibn Auf said in a televised statement Thursday.

The President's removal comes amid a popular uprising against his rule that has seen thousands take to the streets across the northeastern African country.
The largely peaceful protests have escalated in recent days as armed government groups engaged in deadly clashes.

As news of Bashir's ouster spread, people flooded the streets of Khartoum, the capital, in celebration, according to social media reports and witnesses on the ground.

Those jubilant scenes came to an abrupt halt after the coup announcement, however, according to a CNN stringer on the ground.
Chanting against the defense minister began shortly after the military's announcement.

A three-month state of emergency has been declared, and a one-month curfew from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m. put in place.
Airspace and crossings will be closed for 24 hours, and medical facilities will be secured.

Sudan's Cabinet, its National Assembly and municipal bodies have been dissolved, and the country's constitution suspended, Ibn Auf said.
The judiciary, public prosecution, embassies and diplomatic entities will continue to function as normal.

All political prisoners, detained by security services since the wave of anti-government demonstrations gripped the nation in December, will be released, the defense minister added.

At 3:30 a.m. Thursday, Bashir was visited by the heads of his four main security apparatuses and was told "there was no alternative" but for him to step down, two senior military sources with direct knowledge of the conversation told CNN.

According to the sources, Bashir responded by saying "with the blessings of God," an expression of acquiescence in Islamic tradition.

This woman has come to symbolize Sudan's protests


Bashir is under house arrest, according to sources.
His personal guard has been replaced and is under close watch, sources added.
Sudanese Prime Minister Mohamed Taher Ayala and Ahmed Haroun, the head of the ruling National Congress Party, were among dozens of officials who were also arrested, a top military official with direct knowledge of the arrests told CNN.

The Sudanese Intelligence Agency said it ordered the release of all political detainees, the official Sudan News Agency, or SUNA, reported Thursday.
More than 3,000 people have been arrested since protests began in December, based on testimony CNN gathered from activists, lawyers and victims.

But a group that has been leading the protests, the Sudanese Professionals Association, or SPA, rejected the "coup declaration," and has called on people to press on with demonstrations and to stage a sit-in outside military headquarters.
The group said protests would continue until "power is handed over to a civilian transitional government."

"The regime has conducted a military coup to reproduce the same faces and entities that our great people have revolted against," the SPA, an umbrella organization of doctors, lawyers and journalists, said in a statement.

"Those who destroyed the country and killed its people want to appropriate every drop of blood shed by the great people of Sudan during their revolution," it said.

"This is a game on the Sudanese people.
The street refuses totally the announcement by Ibn Auf," activist Omar al-Neel told CNN.
"All Sudanese people are in the street and demanding the downfall of the regime and not recycling the same people."

On Friday morning, the UN Security Council is set to discuss developments in Sudan in closed door discussions, according to the United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations.

Jonathan Allen, UK deputy permanent representative to the United Nations, said Thursday that "the main message again is there must be no violence against those protesters."

"The change proposed by the military isn't enough.
It's not enough to say that it's a two-year transition to civilian rule is adequate," Allen said.
"We need to see much faster transition.
We need to see civilian rule now.
That's what the protesters have been calling for, and that is what we need to do."

US State Department spokesperson Robert Palladino also said on Thursday that "the Sudanese people should determine who leads them and their future," and that they "should be allowed to do so sooner than two years from now."

Egypt's Foreign Ministry has issued a statement in support of the developments in Sudan, emphasizing it stands by "all choices made by the brotherly people of Sudan," and saying it has "full confidence" in the ability of the people of Sudan and "their loyal national army in overcoming this critical state."
The Egyptian army played a pivotal role in the 2011 revolution that toppled Hosni Mubarak and in the 2013 coup against his successor Mohamed Morsy.

Bashir took control after a coup in 1989 and became President in 1993.
He stands accused of conducting a campaign of ethnic cleansing in the country's Darfur region, and was nearly arrested in 2015 while visiting South Africa.
He faces five counts of crimes against humanity and two counts of war crimes in connection to Sudanese military actions in Darfur.

The International Criminal Court has issued two arrest warrants for him and considers him to be "at large."
On Thursday, Human Rights Watch called on Sudanese authorities to execute those warrants.

Sudan's Omar al-Bashir faces five counts of crimes against humanity and two counts of war crimes.


Protests started over the rising costs of living but escalated into a push for Bashir's removal from office, with mass rallies and sit-ins outside the presidential compound and army headquarters.
In February, Bashir declared a yearlong state of emergency in response to the protests.

This week's sit-in had grown into one of the biggest rallies since the uprising began, with crowds braving temperatures of more than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius) to camp out in the streets of the capital.

On Tuesday, members of the Sudanese army moved in to protect protesters in Khartoum after national security forces attempted to break up the third day of a mass sit-ins.

Earlier in the week, the mood among protesters outside the compound had verged on victorious, with people chanting "thawra" (revolution) and waving the national flag aloft as soldiers watched footage from the scene showed.

Photos captured protesters sitting atop military vehicles and handing out water bottles as others posed for selfies with members of the armed forces, flashing V-for-victory gestures.

A CNN team visited Khartoum undercover last month, where it heard reports of possible war crimes by security forces attempting to quell demonstrations.

Sudanese protesters cheer Thursday for passing soldiers near military headquarters in Khartoum.


The Central Committee of Sudan Doctors said 22 people, including five soldiers, were killed in mass protests since Saturday.

Sudan's government has reported some 32 fatalities since the protests began this year, including three security personnel, but doctors and opposition activists suggest the toll is 78, excluding the military.

Sudan has sought to censor news coverage of protests, and journalists reporting on the demonstrations risk life imprisonment and the death penalty.



####
document number 3: 
Net Gain or No Gain?


Zimbabwe’s Coup


Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Retired Ambassador D.
Bruce Wharton, Retired

Members of parliament celebrate 21 November 2017 after President Robert Mugabe’s resignation in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Mugabe was swept from power as his thirty-seven-year reign of brutality and autocratic control crumbled within days of a military takeover.
The bombshell news was delivered by the parliament speaker to a special joint session of the assembly that had convened to impeach Mugabe, who had dominated every aspect of Zimbabwean public life since the country’s independence in 1980.
(Photo by Jekesai Njikizana, Agence France-Presse)


The scene in downtown Harare, Zimbabwe, on 21 November 2017 was extraordinary.
Thousands walked through the streets, cheering, waving Zimbabwean flags, greeting soldiers as heroes, and taking selfies with military personnel in armored vehicles.
Exuberance, not fear, ruled the streets of Harare.
Members of parliament, including those from the ruling party, Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), ululated and danced in the aisles.

Robert Mugabe’s resignation had just been announced by the speaker of parliament, ending a week of fear and uncertainty.

1

Zimbabwe exploded in jubilation in the belief that the long national nightmare of poor governance, corruption, and economic mismanagement was finally ending.
Three days later, the coup (and it was a coup) was sanctified when the High Court of Zimbabwe ruled that the military’s actions were "constitutionally permissible and lawful."

2


In the background, almost drowned out by the cheering of most Zimbabweans, were words of caution.
Former minister of education and human rights lawyer David Coltart warned, "In all of our euphoria we must never become so intoxicated as to forget that it was the same generals who allowed Mugabe to come to power in 2008 and 2013."

3

And, "Once any change of power in any nation comes through a means other than the strict fullfillment of the constitution, in letter and spirit, a dangerous precedent is set, which is hard to reverse."

4

Lawyer and political analyst Alex Magaisa wrote that the Zimbabwean Supreme Court’s decision on the coup amounted to "effectively legalizing military intervention in the affairs of government."

5


So, why were most Zimbabweans so pleased to see Robert Mugabe and his wife Grace pushed from power?
And why was it not a good thing that Zimbabwe’s military forced Mugabe’s resignation?
Let’s look at how Zimbabwe got to November 2017 and what has happened in over a year since then.

War and Independence


Robert Mugabe dedicated his life to ending racist minority rule in Zimbabwe.
He joined the ZANU party in 1960, was imprisoned by the Rhodesian government in 1964 for his political activities, and fled to Mozambique in 1974.
By the late-1970s, it was becoming evident that majority rule would eventually come to Rhodesia, but it was not clear whether Mugabe or his rival revolutionary leader, Joshua Nkomo of the Zimbabwe African People’s Union (ZAPU), would emerge as the national leader.
Ambassador Johnnie Carson, then the deputy chief of mission at the U.S. embassy in Mozambique, was the first official American to meet with Mugabe.
He and the late Congressman Stephen Solarz met Mugabe and two of his chief lieutenants at a deserted airstrip in Quelimane, Mozambique, in July 1976 and left that meeting convinced that Mugabe would prevail as Zimbabwe’s eventual leader.
"He was ruthless and surrounded himself with people who would kill for him," Carson said later.

6


Joice Mujuru speaks 9 December 2012 at the Horasis Global Arab Business Meeting in Ras Al Khaimah, United Arab Emirates.
Mujuru was the vice president of Zimbabwe from 2004 to 2014.
(Photo by Richter Frank-Jurgen via Wikimedia Commons)


As Rhodesia transformed into Zimbabwe-Rhodesia in 1979, and into independent, majority-ruled Zimbabwe in 1980, Ambassador Carson’s prediction proved accurate.
Mugabe became prime minister in 1980, then president in 1987.
Whatever title he bore, Mugabe was clearly the man in charge.

Mugabe’s speech at Zimbabwe’s independence in April 1980 focused on peace and reconciliation.

7

It drew sighs of relief from white Zimbabweans and the West.
Mugabe was eloquent, highly educated, and seemed eminently reasonable.
He was the very model of a modern African leader—a technocrat and the antithesis of corrupt, venal leaders such as Congo’s Mobutu Sese Seko.
The West swooned.

Troubled Rule, Economic Disaster


Viewed in hindsight, however, all was not well.
Mugabe’s control of the media coupled with global attention moving on to other hot spots in the mid-1980s obscured the trouble in Zimbabwe.
Ethno-political tension between Mugabe’s Shona-dominated ZANU on one side and Joshua Nkomo’s Ndebele-focused ZAPU on the other devolved into a conflict that killed as many as twenty thousand people in the mid-1980s.
Most of the casualties were Ndebele civilians in southwestern Zimbabwe, and most of the violence was at the hands of a brigade of Shona-majority Zimbabwean troops trained by North Korea.
Those who threatened Mugabe’s power, people like ZANU guerilla commander Josiah Tongogara, retired Army Chief of Staff Solomon Mujuru, former Vice President Joice Mujuru, and others found themselves demoted or the victims of suspicious accidents.
(Tongogara died in a car accident in 1979, Solomon Mujuru died in a fire in 2011, and Joice Mujuru was dismissed from the vice presidency in 2014.)
Carson’s assessment of Mugabe’s ruthlessness and the willingness of his associates to kill on his behalf was accurate.

Zimbabwe, once the largest exporter of agricultural products in southern Africa, could no longer meet its own food requirement.
‘From breadbasket to basket case’ became the standard descriptor of the country.


By the late-1990s, Mugabe’s mismanagement of the economy and his poor relations with international financial institutions (IFIs) and donor nations had significantly weakened Zimbabwe.
Declining standards of living and life expectancy (lower in 2000 than in 1980) and growing out-migration of skilled workers were outward signs of Zimbabwe’s decline.

8

As the formal economy and the living conditions of the middle and working classes declined, Mugabe built a system of political patronage and tolerated corruption and rent-seeking activities among his supporters.
In 1998, Mugabe sent the military to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the government of Laurent Kabila.
This exercise cost Zimbabwean taxpayers about $1 million per day, but made rich men of the politically connected senior Zimbabwean military officers who were given contracts and concessions for mining, agriculture, and transportation.

9

In 2000, angered that white commercial farmers were providing funding to the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) party, Mugabe unleashed his supporters against the farmers and gave significant land to military, judges, government ministers, and other political supporters.
His so-called "fast-track" land reform program amounted to payoffs to political supporters and a return to subsistence agriculture for the working class.
Zimbabwe, once the largest exporter of agricultural products in southern Africa, could no longer meet its own food requirement.
"From breadbasket to basket case" became the standard descriptor of the country.

10


The Military Develops Corporate and Political Power


In 1997, Mugabe revived a Rhodesian-era institution, the Joint Operations Command (JOC).
The JOC was nominally created to manage overall national security and included the defense minister; the chiefs of the army and air force, national police, and prisons; and the director of national intelligence.
Created to ensure coordination among the security services, the JOC became the de facto guarantor of Mugabe and ZANU’s continued rule.
The JOC developed strategies to influence elections in 2000, 2002, 2005, 2008, and 2013, and it directed the military’s work to intimidate voters, produce loyal or "correct" votes, and manage Election Day intelligence and official reporting of results.

Then president of Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe and his wife, Grace Mugabe, on 4 August 2013.
(Photo by DandjkRoberts via Wikimedia Commons)


The 2008 election was particularly violent.
Tens of thousands of people were displaced, and more than two hundred people were killed by political violence.
Even with this level of intimidation, and electoral results that were withheld for four weeks, Mugabe failed to capture a majority and was forced into a runoff against opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai.
Credible reporting at the time held that Mugabe wanted to concede the election (which Tsvangirai almost certainly won in the first round) but that the JOC, securocrats, and beneficiaries of Mugabe’s patronage system refused to allow his concession.

Some observers of Zimbabwe believe these events were a de facto coup, and that by mid-2008, Mugabe was captive to the corrupt, nondemocratic system he had built over the previous thirty years.
The second round of the 2008 elections proceeded with such pro-ruling party violence that the opposition withdrew to prevent a bloodbath.
The 2008 elections were so grossly flawed and the results so questionable that South Africa and other countries stepped in to force Mugabe into a nominal power-sharing agreement with the opposition.
Although Mugabe and his party retained control of the security services, opposition leader Tsvangirai became prime minister, several ministries went to the opposition, and Zimbabwe enjoyed three years of relative peace and economic progress.

In 2013 and 2018, the JOC coordinated more sophisticated means of fixing elections, including manipulating voter registration and the voters’ rolls.
These measures were so successful in the 2013 election that people were elected on the ruling party ticket who did not even know they were running for office.
Even die-hard ZANU-PF supporters were stunned by the 61–35 margin of their party’s victory.

In 2008, alluvial diamonds were discovered in eastern Zimbabwe, and the military moved in to "secure" this newly discovered asset.

11

Senior military commanders offered partnerships to Chinese mining companies and enjoyed enormous personal profit.
Seven years later, even Mugabe was asking why the nation had not seen any benefits from the diamond mining operations.
He needed only to look at the hotel-sized mansions his generals were building in Harare’s posh neighborhoods to begin to understand where the money had gone.

Grace Mugabe and the Fracturing Ruling Party


Many of those mansion builders were comrades in arms from Zimbabwe’s war of independence.
They, their families, and their business cronies were not eager to give up power or wealth.
They were especially disinclined to share power with those they derisively called "the salad eaters," younger Zimbabweans who had not been involved in the liberation war and had grown up in the cities eating at fancy restaurants.
Younger members of the ruling party—some technocrats and some opportunists—began to challenge the old guard.
This group of younger government officials and business people aligned itself with Grace Mugabe and became known as the "Group of 40 Year Olds," or "G40."

Grace Mugabe was widely reviled in Zimbabwe for her venality and predilection for extravagant shopping trips.
In 2003, when food insecurity brought on by a combination of "land reform" and drought threatened millions of Zimbabweans, Grace was accused of spending $120,000 on shoes and jewelry in a single shopping trip to Paris.
She was also a prime beneficiary of her husband’s "fast-track" land reform program and seized farms, businesses, and real estate for her personal benefit.
Zimbabweans began calling her "Gucci Grace" and "Dis-Grace."
The University of Zimbabwe awarded her a doctoral degree three months after she entered the program, an act of such blatant disregard for educational standards that the university’s vice chancellor was later arrested for it.

People cheer a passing Zimbabwe Defense Force military vehicle 18 November 2017 during a demonstration demanding the resignation of President Robert Mugabe in Harare.
Zimbabwe was set for more political turmoil with protests planned as veterans of the independence war, activists, and ruling party leaders called publicly for Mugabe to be forced from office.
(Photo by Belal Khaled/NurPhoto/Sipa USA via AP Images)


As Mugabe’s age (ninety-three in 2017) caught up with him and his grip on power and his senses began to decline, the rivalry between the old guard and the Grace Mugabe/G40 faction intensified.
In 2014, Grace Mugabe emerged as a serious political player, attacking then Vice President Joice Mujuru in public speeches, using vulgar language and expressions that shocked many Zimbabweans.
At the same time, Grace’s role as nurse and caretaker for her increasingly frail husband was growing.
Mugabe was becoming more prone to falling asleep in public, mumbling and stumbling, and needing more frequent trips to Singapore and Dubai for medical attention.
The old guard’s nightmare scenario was one in which Grace’s power grew in direct proportion to Mugabe’s failing health, as she became the sole gatekeeper and conveyor of his wishes, taking his political legacy and power for her own.
The intraparty fissures between the G40 and the old guard intensified and threatened those who thought they had earned the right to rule and profit from Zimbabwe because of their service in the war for independence.
Mugabe fired Mujuru in December 2014, accusing her of "factionalism."
Typical of the political balancing act Mugabe had choreographed for years, he then appointed his long-time aide, Emmerson Mnangagwa, to succeed Mujuru as vice president.
As long as neither the G40 nor the old guard had too much power and the factions balanced each other out, Mugabe was safe.
He was also trapped, though, in the finely balanced, no-clear-successor, political structure he had built.

Triggering the Coup


In early November 2017, Mugabe hinted that he might name his wife as vice president.
This strengthened the G40’s hopes of taking power and threatened the old guard and the military.
The ruling party’s youth league called for Mugabe to dismiss Mnangagwa, and Grace joined in the chorus.
Provincial ruling-party committees began to pass resolutions calling for Grace to be made vice president.

On 6 November, Mugabe dismissed Emmerson Mnangagwa as vice president, and Mnangagwa fled to Mozambique fearing for his safety.
On 12 November, then commander of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces Gen.
Constantino Chiwenga returned from an official trip to China.
The G40, working with Zimbabwe Republic Police commander Augustine Chihuri, planned to arrest Chiwenga upon his arrival at the airport in Harare.
Chiwenga, however, was tipped off, and soldiers disguised as baggage handlers overpowered the police and prevented Chiwenga’s arrest.
On 13 November, Chiwenga released a statement warning that the "purging" of ZANU-PF officials must stop.

12

In response, a party spokesman accused Chiwenga of "treasonable actions."

13

That was it.

President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Emmerson Mnangagwa, on 15 January 2019.
Mnangagwa assumed the office of president in November 2017 after the resignation of Robert Mugabe.
(Photo courtesy of kremlin.ru via Wikimedia Commons)


On 14 November, there were reports of unusual movement of military vehicles on the northwestern approaches to Harare.
That night, military forces took control of state television and radio and placed Robert and Grace Mugabe under house arrest at their residence.
Security forces arrested or pursued a number of G40-aligned government officials.
Some gunfire was heard in the city, and a few G40 officials sought refuge or went into hiding.

On 15 November, Maj.
Gen.
Sibusiso Moyo spoke to the people of Zimbabwe via state television and radio.
He denied that there had been a coup and said that the military was "only targeting criminals around [Mugabe] who are committing crimes … that are causing social and economic suffering in the country."
Moyo sought to reassure the country that Mugabe and his family were "safe and sound."
Moyo went on to say, "As soon as we have accomplished our mission, we expect that the situation will return to normalcy."

14


Over the next six days, Zimbabweans lived in suspense, as negotiations took place among the military, Robert Mugabe, and South African facilitators.
On 17 November, Mugabe was allowed out of his home to preside over a graduation ceremony at a local university.
On 18 November, thousands of Zimbabweans took to the streets in peaceful demonstrations calling for Mugabe’s resignation.
On 19 November, ZANU-PF dismissed Mugabe as its leader, but he was allowed to deliver a televised speech in which he was expected to announce his resignation as president of Zimbabwe.
Much to the obvious consternation of the military officers sitting with him during the speech, he did not resign.

15

On 20 November, the Zimbabwean parliament voted to begin impeachment proceedings against Mugabe on charges of "allowing his wife to usurp constitutional power."

16

On 21 November, as impeachment proceedings were underway and with the prospect of a Gaddhafi-like demise becoming more real, Mugabe formally resigned.
When the speaker of the parliament read Mugabe’s resignation letter to parliament, members of both the opposition and ruling parties began to cheer, ululate, and dance.

When the speaker of the parliament read Mugabe’s resignation letter to parliament, members of both the opposition and ruling parties began to cheer, ululate, and dance.


Emmerson Mnangagwa returned to Zimbabwe on 22 November and was sworn in as president on 24 November.
In his inaugural address and in the months that followed, Mnangagwa proffered a welcome change of rhetoric from his predecessor.
He acknowledged the mistakes of previous economic and land reform programs and pledged to correct them.
He spoke of his determination to fight corruption, create jobs, and improve relations with the IFIs and the West.
Zimbabwean business people believed Mnangagwa was pragmatic about business and investment, and he would make good economic decisions.
Civil society and media leaders perceived a greater tolerance for criticism of the government than had been the case under Mugabe.
In the first weeks of the "new dispensation," as Zimbabwean politicians called the Mnangagwa government, things were looking up.

As Mnangagwa assembled his cabinet, there was hope he would reach across the aisle and appoint some members of the opposition.
That did not happen.
Instead, Mnangagwa’s cabinet was heavy on career military officers who traded in their epaulets for pinstripes, confirming for all that this was nothing less than a coup.

Chiwenga, who on 13 November had warned against purging ZANU-PF officials, became one of Mnangagwa’s two vice presidents and remained head of the Joint Operations Command.
Lt. Gen.
Moyo, who had taken to the airwaves on 15 November to reassure Zimbabweans that no coup was underway, became minister of foreign affairs and international trade.
Air Marshal Perence Shiri, former commander of the North Korean-trained Fifth Brigade, became minister of lands, agriculture and rural resettlement.
Lt. Gen.
Engelbert Rugeje became the national political commissar for the ruling ZANU-PF party.

Each of these career military officers nominally retired before assuming their new civilian positions, but their presence in such senior positions gives rise to serious questions about who is really in charge in Zimbabwe.
More than once, Chiwenga has appeared to contradict or ignore a statement or policy position from Mnangagwa.
Two months before the 2018 election, the deputy minister of finance said what everyone was thinking, that there was no way the military would allow the opposition to win.
Terrence Mukupe said to supporters, "How can we say, honestly, the soldiers took the country, practically snatched it from Mugabe, to come and hand it over to [opposition leader] Chamisa?"

17


Still, the general impression among common Zimbabweans was that Mnangagwa brought improvement, and more importantly, Mugabe was out.
The opposition was allowed to campaign in rural areas that had been off limits to them for years.
People were less fearful of speaking critically of the government in public places.
International media, long denied visas to report from Zimbabwe, were able to operate openly and file stories.
Incidents of political violence declined.
Mnangagwa invited international observers from Europe and the United States to observe the 2018 elections, and his government appeared interested in seeking to rejoin the Commonwealth.
Perhaps most important to ordinary Zimbabweans, the predatory actions of the Zimbabwean police—seeking bribes at road checkpoints every few kilometers—stopped.

Inside government, no one spoke of a coup.
Rather, the events of November 2017 were called a "military assisted transition."
Outside of government, it was called a coup or, with Zimbabwe’s typically wry sense of humor, the "coup that wasn’t a coup" or the "not-a-coup coup."
It was, of course, a coup, albeit one that had been informally endorsed by a jubilant public, officially endorsed by Zimbabwe’s High Court, and tacitly endorsed by neighboring states, the Africa Union, and all of the nations that sent election observers to the July 2018 elections, including the United States.

Inside government, no one spoke of a coup.
Rather, the events of November 2017 were called a ‘military assisted transition.’


2018 Elections Fall Short


What President Mnangagwa and Zimbabwe needed to fully quell the coup/no coup debate, or show that a coup could be a good thing, was a peaceful, transparent, and credible election.
Only through such an election—scheduled for 31 July 2018—could Mnangagwa’s government be certified as legitimate.
That legitimacy was needed to restore confidence in Zimbabwe; resolve differences with former allies such as the United Kingdom, the European Union, and the United States; rebuild relations with the IFIs; and attract new investment.
While Mnangagwa’s rhetoric on issues such as land reform, human rights, rule of law, improving the business climate, and reducing corruption was all positive, there was little actual action behind the words.
Some Zimbabweans argued that Mnangagwa was still beholden to the military leaders who put him in power and could not afford to undertake serious reforms until he had an electoral mandate.
So, a credible election was vital not just to Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community but for Mnangagwa’s hold on power as well.

It became clear to most observers in the months leading up to the election that the process was unlikely to deliver the credibility and legitimacy the government needed.
Registration of voters appeared skewed to the advantage of traditional ZANU-PF supporters in rural areas and against young urban voters more likely to support the opposition.
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) did not appear to be independent of the government and declined to be any more transparent than strictly demanded by the law.
Procurement and printing of ballots—a sensitive topic in Zimbabwe—was undertaken in secrecy, and the final ballot did not adhere to Zimbabwe’s own standards.
While the opposition did have more freedom to campaign than they had in previous elections, their access to state media was limited in violation of Zimbabwe’s electoral law.
The military steadfastly declined to state publicly that they would respect the outcome of the election, even if the opposition won.
Given the Zimbabwean military command’s history of saying they would never salute an opposition government, and their role in political violence in previous elections, their refusal to state that they would accept the will of the people had a chilling effect on the process.

July 31, Election Day, was orderly and peaceful.
On 1 August, the ZEC released preliminary results indicating that ZANU-PF had won a majority of seats in parliament.
Opposition supporters protested what they believed was a rigged outcome and clashed with military forces in downtown Harare.
Six protestors were killed in the confrontation.
(In November 2018, a government-appointed commission of inquiry completed its investigation of the 1 August conflict and submitted its report to Mnangagwa.
As of 5 December, the report had not been made public.)
On 3 August, the ZEC declared Emmerson Mnangagwa the winner with 50.8 percent of the vote to opposition leader Nelson Chamisa’s 44.3 percent.
These results are in line with public opinion research conducted by Afrobarometer in June and July 2018, so they may well be a legitimate result.
Unfortunately, Zimbabwe’s history of rigged and violent electoral processes, the ZEC’s lack of transparency, the government’s inability to follow its own electoral laws, and the military’s unwillingness to pledge support for the people’s will left the 2018 election short of the credibility needed to rehabilitate the government’s legitimacy.
The process was an improvement over 2013, and a great improvement over 2008 and 2002, but enough questions remained to undermine confidence in government.

The New Dispensation


If Zimbabwe proves true to form, the country will settle into an uneasy political peace as common Zimbabweans struggle to make ends meet in a continually declining economy.
Mnangagwa will remain president for at least five years.
The ruling party has already announced that Mnangagwa will be their candidate in 2023, so he could be president through 2028, at which point he will be eighty-six years old.

While Mugabe has left the political scene, he and Grace continue to live in peace in Zimbabwe, much as his predecessor Ian Smith did for more than twenty years after majority rule came in 1980.
But other than a different president, Zimbabwe has not changed much.
As the events January 2019 have shown—the grossly disproportionate use of police and military force to stop protests and looting—Zimbabwe’s government/ruling party remains willing to do whatever it takes to remain in power.
Credible reporting by independent media and NGOs indicate twelve to eighteen citizens killed, scores wounded, and hundreds arrested in a three-week long government crackdown against protestors and members of the MDC opposition party.
Most disturbingly, there are credible reports of security forces raping women to suppress protests.

18

Tragically, this government/ruling party use of violence against its own citizens looks just like what the Mugabe-led government/ruling party did in the mid-1980s and the early 2000s.

Zimbabweans celebrate 18 November 2017 after President Robert Mugabe resigned in Harare, Zimbabwe.
(Photo by Philimon Bulawayo, Reuters)


While there has been some new openness in political dialogue and more freedom for dissent, the state still controls radio and television, and it shut down the internet for several days during the January 2019 protests.
While the government’s talking points on fundamental issues such as rule of law, debt, and international cooperation are more rational, measurable reform is elusive.
Shona-speaking political, business, and military elite continue to call the shots and live in luxury while the middle class emigrates and the poor suffer on.
The government’s economic managers continue to look for short-term responses to systemic problems, print fake money, and extract hard currency from any place they can find it.
The military remains the strongest, most capable institution in the country, and the High Court’s blessing of the November 2017 coup keeps the threat of another coup alive.
The executive branch of government has subordinated the judiciary and completely overshadows the parliament.
Bankable title to agricultural land remains only a promise, so there is no collateral for new investment that could revive commercial agriculture and Zimbabwe’s economy.
Mining continues to generate some export earnings, but disputes with Chinese and Russian mining companies have hurt those ventures, and Western companies see more secure opportunities in neighboring countries.
Much of the popular gratitude for the military’s removal of Mugabe evaporated on 1 August 2018 when soldiers shot and killed six protesters.

19

Public support for Mnangagwa and hope for reform is being trampled out of existence by the brutal actions of security forces in January 2019.
Hopes that the coup of November 2017 opened a new beginning for Zimbabwe have proven false.

Are All Coups Bad?


According to data collected by University of Kentucky political scientists Jonathan Powell and Clayton Thyne, there were about 450 coups worldwide between 1950 and 2010.

20

Most, like Zimbabwe’s, effected little change in a country’s underlying problems of poor governance, corruption, weak rule of law, and bad economic policy.
The authors found that "coups promote democratization, particularly among states that are least likely to democratize otherwise."

21

However, looking at a list of current African leaders who have come to power via a coup, it is hard to see much promotion of democracy.
That list includes Obiang in Equatorial Guinea, Museveni in Uganda, Guelleh in Djibouti, Sassou Nguesso in the Republic of Congo, Abdel Aziz in Mauritania, Bashir in Sudan, and Deby in Chad.
It’s not easy to see the democratizing impulse in any of these leaders.

Still, law professor Ozan Varol, author of

The Democratic Coup d’État

, argues that a military coup can sometimes establish a democracy.
Varol lays out the following criteria for judging whether a coup is "democratic":


the coup is staged against an authoritarian or totalitarian regime,


the military responds to persistent popular opposition against that regime,


the authoritarian or totalitarian regime refuses to step down in response to the popular uprising,


the coup is staged by a military that is highly respected within the nation, ordinarily because of mandatory conscription,


the military stages the coup to overthrow the authoritarian or totalitarian regime,


the military facilitates free and fair elections within a short span of time, and


the coup ends with the transfer of power to democratically elected leaders.

22



Varol acknowledges that the vast majority of military coups are undemocratic in nature, and evaluated by his criteria, Zimbabwe’s November 2017 coup is one of that majority.

Exceptions may illustrate the rule.
Portugal’s 1974 coup, Turkey’s coup in 1960 and, perhaps, Ghana’s coup in 1979 each seem to have led to stronger democracies.
Ghana’s was an incremental process, and Turkey is backsliding today, but Portugal remains an example of a coup that delivered democracy.
However, three positive examples out of more than 450 coups or attempted coups is poor evidence of the efficacy of coups in advancing democratic governance.

As in Zimbabwe, coups generally leave the judiciary alone in exchange for some sort of court ruling that legitimizes the military’s undemocratic action.
And therein lies the greatest problem for coups.
Once the courts legitimize a coup—an unconstitutional transfer of power—the bar is set lower and it sets a precedent for future coups.
The one thing that coups seem to do consistently is increase the likelihood of subsequent coups.

If Zimbabwe’s parliament had acted to impeach Robert Mugabe on their own accord, rather than waiting for the military to act first, Zimbabwe’s chances for lasting, fundamental reform would be better than they are today.
The immediate result, a Mnangagwa presidency, would likely have been the same.
But, the parliament would be seen as a more potent branch of government, the judiciary would be less compromised, and the military could maintain the facade of being apolitical.
These factors would have contributed to Zimbabwean and international confidence in the country’s commitment to the rule of law and democratic process.
The climb back to respectability would have been a little less steep, and the odds of another nondemocratic transfer of power a little less likely.

Zimbabweans remain a remarkable people, capable of finding solutions to problems that would overwhelm others, and they deserve the chance to overcome their current challenges.
Until recent unrest in response to the rise in petroleum prices and high inflation, most Zimbabweans still hoped for reform of the country’s governance and economic systems, and some were still willing to give Emmerson Mnangagwa time to show that he is the reformer he has promised to be.
However, recent splits within ZANU-PF and clear lack of control of the military by Mnangagwa, who responded to demonstrations with the live-fire killings of at least twelve and injuring of hundreds, including sixty-eight people wounded by gunfire, show that the marriage of convenience between Mnangagwa and the military is unraveling.
Signs that Mnangagwa and his government understood the expectations their citizens have of them were optimistic at best.
Early euphoria has translated to high levels of frustration by a disaffected and marginalized youth population affected by high unemployment, shortages of major staples, and scarcity of foreign currency.
Hopes that Zimbabwe, through Mnangagwa, would be one of those rare examples of a military coup that restores democracy are slowly and methodically being dashed by a military not willing to allow change.

Notes



"Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe Resigns, Ending 37-Year Rule," BBC News, 21 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-42071488.


Austin Koltonowski, "Zimbabwe High Court Rules Military Intervention Constitutional," Jurist, 27 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.jurist.org/news/2017/11/zimbabwe-high-court-rules-military-intervention-constitutional/.


Jackie Cameron, "Zimbabwe MDC Founder David Coltart: Too Early to Celebrate, Military Must Return to Barracks," BizNews, 20 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.biznews.com/global-citizen/2017/11/20/zimbabwe-mdc-david-coltart.


David Coltart, "Op-Ed: Zimbabwe Faces a Grave Constitutional Crisis," Daily Maverick, 16 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2017-11-16-op-ed-zimbabwe-faces-a-grave-constitutional-crisis/.


Associated Press, Zimbabwe Judge Says Military Action against Mugabe Was Legal," CBC News, 25 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/zimbabwe-mugabe-military-action-ruled-legal-1.4419641.


Johnnie Carson, discussions with D.
Bruce Wharton, July 2012 and January 2019.


"President Mugabe’s 1980 Independence Speech," Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation, 10 April 2012, accessed 23 January 2019, http://www.zbc.co.zw/president-mugabes-1980-independence-speech/.


"Zimbabwe," The World Bank, accessed 23 January 2019, https://data.worldbank.org/country/zimbabwe.


Wilson Johwa, Zimbabwe’s Secret War in the DRC,"

Mail Guardian

(website), 11 September 2004, accessed 23 January 2019, https://mg.co.za/article/2004-09-11-zimbabwes-secret-war-in-the-drc.


The phrase "from breadbasket to basket case," used to describe Zimbabwe’s downfall under the Mugabe regime, appears in numerous articles.
See for example, "From Breadbasket to Basket Case: Faced with Famine, Robert Mugabe Orders Farmers to Stop Growing Food,"

The Economist

(website), 27 June 2002, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2002/06/27/from-breadbasket-to-basket-case.


David Towriss, "Buying Loyalty: Zimbabwe’s Marange Diamonds,"

Journal of Southern African Studies

39, no.
1 (21 March 2013): 99–117, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263377948_Buying_Loyalty_Zimbabwe’s_Marange_Diamonds.


"Zimbabwe Military Chief Chiwenga in ZANU-PF Purge Warning," BBC News, 13 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-41970317.


"Zimbabwe: Army Chief Accused of ‘Treasonable Conduct,’" BBC News, 14 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-41991425.


Bill Chappell, "Zimbabwe’s Mugabe Out of Power for First Time since 1980s as Military Takes Control," NPR, 15 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/11/15/564320495/zimbabwes-mugabe-is-out-of-power-for-first-time-since-1980s-military-denies-coup.


David McKenzie et al., "Zimbabwe’s Mugabe Vows to Stay in Power Despite Pressure to Resign," CNN, 19 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/19/africa/zimbabwe-mugabe-party-meeting/index.html.


"Zimbabwe Latest: Mugabe ‘Let Wife Grace Usurp Power,’" BBC News, 20 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-42055726.


"‘MDC Will Never Rule Zimbabwe,’ Says Controversial Mnangagwa Aide," News24, 31 May 2018, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.news24.com/Africa/Zimbabwe/mdc-will-never-rule-zimbabwe-says-controversial-mnangagwa-minister-20180531.


"Zimbabwe Women Urged to Report Rape by Soldiers," BBC News, 29 January 2019, accessed 4 February 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-47042101.


Farai Mutsaka, "Zimbabwe Inquiry Finds Army, Police Killed 6 during Protest," Associated Press, 18 December 2018, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.apnews.com/da834ecd975b4cd3941c06596a42e835.


Clayton L. Thyne and Jonathan M.
Powell, "Coup d’État or Coup d’Autocracy?
How Coups Impact Democratization, 1950–2008,"

Foreign Policy Analysis

12, no.
2 (1 April 2016): 192–213, https://academic.oup.com/fpa/article-abstract/12/2/192/2367607?redirectedFrom=fulltext [requires an Oxford Academic account].


Ibid.


Ozan Varol,

The Democratic Coup d’Etat

(New York: Oxford University Press, 2017).



Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield retired from the Senior Foreign Service of the United States in 2017 after thirty-five years of service.
She is a senior counselor at Albright Stonebridge Group in their Africa practice and a Distinguished Fellow of African Studies at Georgetown University.
She was assistant secretary for African affairs from 2013 to 2017 and director general of the Foreign Service and director of personnel from 2012 to 2013.
Thomas-Greenfield was ambassador to Liberia from 2008 to 2012

Ambassador D.
Bruce Wharton, a retired member of the Senior Foreign Service of the United States, served as the U.S. ambassador to Zimbabwe from 2012 to 2015, and principal deputy secretary of state for African affairs from 2015 to 2016.
He also served as the public affairs officer at the U.S. embassy in Zimbabwe from 1999 to 2003.

Back to Top



####
document number 4: 
Morocco Warns Of Growing Terrorist Threat In Mali


The U.N. Security Council is expected to take action soon to approve an African military intervention force for Mali.
Morocco is nervous about the al-Qaida affiliate based in Northern Mali, a group that is now training and supporting extremists across the continent.
That's a fear the head of U.S. Africa Command is also raising.
But both he and officials in Morocco say there needs to be a two-tracked approach — a military intervention to root out al-Qaida and a big diplomatic push to reunite Mali.
A coup led to a power vacuum with al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb now controlling the north.

AUDIE CORNISH, HOST:

From NPR News, this is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.
I'm Audie Cornish.

MELISSA BLOCK, HOST:

And I'm Melissa Block.

The African nation of Mali is one of the many pressing topics facing the U.N. Security Council this month.
After a coup in Mali back in March, an al-Qaida affiliate seized control of the northern part of the country, and the terrorist threat there is growing.
As NPR's Michele Kelemen reports, U.S. officials aren't the only ones raising alarms.

MICHELE KELEMEN, BYLINE: A top Moroccan official was making the rounds in Washington this week, warning of a growing extremist threat in Africa from the Gulf of Guinea to the Gulf of Yemen.
Speaking in between meetings, the minister delegate for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation Youssef Amrani says the international community needs to do something and fast about northern Mali, which has become a safe haven for al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

YOUSSEF AMRANI: It's urgent because if we don't find appropriate solutions, the situation will get worse.
This will reinforce the extremist movement who are working today for the instability for the whole region.

KELEMEN: Morocco is the current president of the U.N. Security Council, and Amrani says his country will make sure that the council passes a resolution to authorize an African intervention force for Mali.

AMRANI: We need people who knows the region and the country.
And Africans have taken the lead.
That's good.

KELEMEN: But the Africans have offered just 3,000 troops to battle extremists in a region the size of Texas.
And that's just not enough, says J.
Peter Pham of the Atlantic Council, who points out that even the U.N. secretary general isn't ready to put U.N. funds behind that African plan.

J.
PETER PHAM: It's like a child who keeps turning in the same piece of homework over and over and over trying to wear the teacher down into accepting it.
I don't think that's a helpful strategy.
I think the Security Council really has to take the leadership role here.

KELEMEN: Pham says it will take several more months to get a force trained, funded, and ready to intervene.
The top U.S. military commander for Africa, General Carter Ham, was asked at George Washington University this week whether that's too late.

GENERAL CARTER HAM: As each day goes by, al-Qaida and other organizations are strengthening their hold in northern Mali.

KELEMEN: Ham says there's evidence that extremists from other countries, including Nigeria, have gone to northern Mali for training.
And the AFRICOM commander says al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb is one of the best-funded and well-armed al-Qaida affiliates these days.
But he cautions against premature military action, saying the real challenge is countering al-Qaida's ideology.

HAM: The military is a - an essential but non-decisive component of countering that ideology.
It will be more successful when there's good governance, when there's economic development, when there's medical care, when there's hope and opportunity for people so that they foresee a better future and are not susceptible to a more extremist ideology which presently seems to be gaining traction.

KELEMEN: On Mali, diplomats are trying to help reunite the country.
The Moroccan foreign ministry official, Amrani, says the goal is to reach out to indigenous Tuareg rebels in the north to peel them away from al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

AMRANI: If they agree to play the game, if I may say so, that will be a good opportunity to help the Malians to reinforce their national cohesion.

KELEMEN: But for negotiations to succeed there also needs to be a legitimate government in Mali.
And that hasn't been the case since a coup earlier this year, says Pham of the Atlantic Council.

PHAM: One of the reasons for the Tuareg uprising in northern Mali was previous peace deals were broken.
If the Tuaregs had grievances about broken deals with legitimate governments, why would they ever sign a deal with a government that's not supported?

KELEMEN: That's one more problem for the countries in the region and the international community to help solve to try to prevent al-Qaida from digging themselves in.
Michele Kelemen, NPR News, Washington.

Copyright © 2012 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.


By subscribing, you agree to NPR's terms of use and privacy policy.
NPR may share your name and email address with your NPR station.
See Details.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.



####
document number 5: 
Timeline: Political crisis in Ukraine and Russia's occupation of Crimea


KIEV (Reuters) - Here is a timeline of the fall of Ukraine’s government and Russia’s subsequent incursion into Ukraine’s Crimea region.


Ukrainian navy ships are docked at the Crimean port of Yevpatorya March 8, 2014.
REUTERS/David Mdzinarishvili


The crisis began in November when Ukraine’s then president, Viktor Yanukovich, under Russian pressure, turned his back on a trade deal with the EU and accepted a $15 billion bailout from Moscow.
That prompted three months of street protests, leading to the overthrow of Yanukovich on February 22.

Moscow denounced the events as an illegitimate coup and refused to recognize the new Ukrainian authorities.
In late February, Russian troops seized the Crimean peninsula in a bloodless military takeover.

* Nov 21: Kiev suddenly announces suspension of trade and association talks with the EU and opts to revive economic ties with Moscow.

Several hundred Ukrainians gather on the capital’s central Independence Square to protest.

* Nov 22: Jailed opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko urges Ukrainians to protest against the switch away from the EU.

* Nov 24: Some 100,000 people rally in Kiev against spurning the EU.

* Nov 25: Ukrainian police fire tear gas at demonstrators.

* Nov 29: At the EU summit in the Lithuanian capital Vilnius, Yanukovich fails to sign the association agreement.

* Nov 30: Riot police try to break up the Kiev demonstration by force.
Protest turns against Yanukovich and his government.

* Dec 1: Some 350,000 people protest in Kiev and clash with police.
Crowds turn Independence Square into a protest tent city.
Opposition leaders call on Yanukovich to resign.

* Dec 4: Senior EU officials and ministers start visiting the protest square.

* Dec 6: Yanukovich holds previously unannounced talks in Sochi with Putin on "strategic partnership".

* Dec 8: Some 800,000 people rally in Kiev.
A statue of Lenin is toppled.

* Dec 13: Yanukovich’s first face-to-face talks with opposition bring no breakthrough in crisis.

* Dec 15: EU suspends talks with Ukraine on the pact.
Some 200,000 people rally in Kiev.

* Dec 17: Yanukovich and Putin meet for second time since crisis began.
Putin agrees to buy $15 billion of Ukrainian debt and to slash by a third the price of Russian gas supplies to Ukraine.

* Dec 18: Tens of thousands of protesters gather in Kiev, calling for Yanukovich to resign over bailout.

* Dec 20: About 100,000 take to square in central Kiev, opposition forms bloc called Maidan.

Dec 24: Ukraine receives first $3 billion tranche of Russian bailout.

* Jan 12: At least 50,000 protesters march in Kiev, reviving the movement after a Christmas and New Year lull.

* Jan 15: Ukraine court bans protests in central Kiev.

* Jan 17: Yanukovich signs new laws banning anti-government protests.

* Jan 19: Thousands protest in Kiev defying ban, some clashing with riot police.

* Jan 22: Three people die during protests and EU threatens action over handling of crisis.
Talks between opposition and Yanukovich fail.

* Jan 23: Washington threatens sanctions if violence continues.

* Jan 26: Police clash with protesters in Kiev.
Unrest spreads to traditionally pro-Yanukovich east.
Yanukovich offers important government posts to opposition, who say they will press for more concessions, including early elections.

* Jan 27: Yanukovich and opposition agree to scrap some of the anti-protest laws.
Protesters try to storm Kiev cultural centre.

* Jan 28: Ukrainian Prime Minister Mykola Azarov resigns.
Deputies loyal to Yanukovich overturn anti-protest laws in a bid to restore calm.

* Jan 30: Yanukovich goes on sick leave, announcing that he is suffering from an acute respiratory ailment.

* Jan 31: Still on sick leave, Yanukovich signs into law a conditional amnesty for those detained in the unrest.

* Feb 2: Yanukovich returns to work after four days’ sick leave, protesters fill Kiev’s main square.

* Feb 7: Moscow accuses the United States of trying to foment a coup in Ukraine.
Washington says Russia leaked a recording of U.S. diplomats discussing how to shape a new government in Kiev.

* Feb 9: Pressure on Yanukovich grows as protests against him continue and Russia links disbursement of next tranche of a $15 billion aid package to repayment of hefty gas bill.

* Feb 14: Russia accuses EU of seeking Ukraine "sphere of influence".
Protesters released under amnesty but streets still tense.

* Feb 17: Russia boosts Yanukovich with $2 billion fresh cash injection to Ukraine.

* Feb 18: At least 14 people die as protesters clash with police in worst violence since demonstrations began.

* Feb 19: West threatens sanctions after death toll rises to 26.
Yanukovich denounces bloodshed as an attempted coup.

* Feb 20: At least 39 die in clashes in Kiev.
Foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland meet with Yanukovich, extend stay to put a political roadmap to opposition leaders.

* Feb 21: Opposition leaders sign EU-mediated peace pact Yanukovich to end violence that killed at least 77 people.

* Feb 22: Ukraine’s parliament votes to remove Yanukovich, who flees his Kiev office, denouncing what he says is a coup.
His arch-rival Yulia Tymoshenko is released from jail.

* Feb 24: Fugitive Yanukovich indicted for "mass murder" over demonstrator deaths.
Moscow says it will not deal with leaders of "armed mutiny" against Yanukovich.

* Feb 26: Ukraine names ministers for new government.
Angry Russia puts 150,000 troops on high alert.
Washington warns Moscow against military intervention.

* Feb 27: Armed men seize Crimea parliament, raise Russian flag.
Kiev’s new rulers warn Moscow to keep troops within its naval base on the peninsula.
Hryvnia falls to record low.

* Feb 28: Armed men take control of two airports in Crimea, described by Ukrainian minister as invasion by Moscow’s forces.
Ousted Yanukovich surfaces in Russia after a week on the run.

* March 1: Putin wins parliamentary approval to invade Ukraine.
In Kiev, new government warns of war, puts troops on high alert and appeals to NATO for help.
White House warns Russia of economic, political isolation.
Russian forces fan out in Crimea.
Pro-Moscow demonstrations erupt across Ukraine’s south and east in what Kiev calls an attempt to repeat Crimea scenario.

* March 2: Russian forces tighten grip on Crimea.
Ukraine announces call-up of reserves.
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry condemns Russia for "incredible act of aggression", threatening "very serious repercussions".

* March 3: Markets open for first time since Kremlin announcement of right to invade.
Russian share prices and ruble plummet.

* March 4: Putin announces end to war games in Western Russia, orders troops near frontier back to barracks.
Ukraine says Russian navy has blocked strait between Crimea and Russia.
Putin says military force in Ukraine would only be "last resort".
Kerry in Kiev.
U.S. official says Washington working on sanctions against Russia.

* March 5: Russia rebuffs calls to withdraw troops from Crimea, saying "self-defense" forces are not under its command.
European Union pledges 11 billion euros in aid to Kiev.

* March 6: Crimea’s pro-Russian leadership votes to join Russia and sets referendum for March 16, escalating crisis.
U.S. President Barack Obama says referendum would violate international law and orders sanctions on those responsible for Moscow’s military intervention in Ukraine.

EU leaders hold an emergency summit to try to find ways to pressure Russia to back down and accept mediation.
Military monitors from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe barred from entering Crimea.

* March 7: After hour-long phone call with Obama, Putin says they are still far apart.

* March 8: Warning shots are fired to prevent an unarmed international military observer mission from entering Crimea.
Russian forces become increasingly aggressive towards Ukrainian troops trapped in bases.



####
document number 6: 
Arab Spring




The Arab Spring was a series of pro-democracy uprisings that enveloped several largely Muslim countries, including Tunisia, Morocco, Syria, Libya, Egypt and Bahrain.
The events in these nations generally began in the spring of 2011, which led to the name.
However, the political and social impact of these popular uprisings remains significant today, years after many of them ended.

What Is the Arab Spring?


The Arab Spring was a loosely related group of protests that ultimately resulted in regime changes in countries such as Tunisia, Egypt and Libya.
Not all of the movements, however, could be deemed successful—at least if the end goal was increased democracy and cultural freedom.

In fact, for many countries enveloped by the revolts of the Arab Spring, the period since has been hallmarked by increased instability and oppression.

Given the significant impact of the Arab Spring throughout northern Africa and the Middle East, it’s easy to forget the series of large-scale political and social movements arguably began with a single act of defiance.

Jasmine Revolution


The Arab Spring began in December 2010 when Tunisian street vendor Mohammed Bouazizi set himself on fire to protest the arbitrary seizing of his vegetable stand by police over failure to obtain a permit.

Bouazizi’s sacrificial act served as a catalyst for the so-called Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia.

The street protests that ensued in Tunis, the country’s capital, eventually prompted authoritarian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to abdicate his position and flee to Saudi Arabia.
He had ruled the country with an iron fist for more than 20 years.

Activists in other countries in the region were inspired by the regime change in Tunisia—the country’s first democratic parliamentary elections were held in October 2011—and began to protest similar authoritarian governments in their own nations.

The participants in these grassroots movements sought increased social freedoms and greater participation in the political process.
Notably, this includes the Tahrir Square uprisings in Cairo, Egypt and similar protests in Bahrain.

However, in some cases, these protests morphed into full-scale civil wars, as evidenced in countries such as Libya, Syria and Yemen.

Why The Name ‘Arab Spring’?


The name "Arab Spring" is a reference to the Revolutions of 1848—also known as the "People’s Spring"—when political upheavals swept Europe.
Ever since, "spring" has been used to describe movements toward democracy like Czechoslovakia’s 1968 "Prague Spring."
Western media began popularizing the term "Arab Spring" in 2011.

Arab Spring Aftermath


While the uprising in Tunisia led to some improvements in the country from a human-rights perspective, not all of the nations that witnessed such social and political upheaval in the spring of 2011 changed for the better.

Most notably, in Egypt, where early changes arising from the Arab Spring gave many hope after the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak, authoritarian rule has apparently returned.
Following the controversial election of Mohamed Morsi in 2012, a coup led by defense minister Abdel Fattah el-Sisi installed the latter as president in 2013, and he remains in power today.

Muammar Gaddafi


In Libya, meanwhile, authoritarian dictator Colonel Muammar Qaddafi was overthrown in October 2011, during a violent civil war, and he was tortured (literally dragged through the streets) and executed by opposition fighters.
Video footage of his death was seen by millions online.

WATCH: 8 Controversial Moments When Smartphones Changed The World

However, since Qaddafi’s downfall, Libya has remained in a state of civil war, and two opposing governments effectively rule separate regions of the country.
Libya’s civilian population has suffered significantly during the years of political upheaval, with violence in the streets and access to food, resources and healthcare services severely limited.

This has contributed, in part, to the ongoing worldwide refugee crisis, which has seen thousands flee Libya, most often by boat across the Mediterranean Sea, with hopes of new opportunities in Europe.

Bashar al Assad


Similarly, the civil war in Syria that began in the aftermath of the Arab Spring lasted for several years, forcing many to leave the country to seek refuge in Turkey, Greece and throughout Western Europe.
For a time, the militant group ISIS had declared a caliphate—a nation governed by Islamic law—in northeastern Syria.

The group executed thousands of people, and many others fled the region in fear of their lives.

Yet, although ISIS has largely been defeated in Syria, the oppressive regime of long-time dictator Bashar al Assad remains in power in the country.

In addition, the ongoing civil war in Yemen can also be traced to the Arab Spring.
The country’s infrastructure has suffered significant damage, and the conflict has devolved into tribal warfare.

And in Bahrain, peaceful pro-democracy protests in the capital Manama in 2011 and 2012 were violently suppressed by the government of King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa.
Officially, the country has a constitutional monarchy form of government, but personal freedoms remain limited.

The plight of the Bahraini people was dramatically portrayed in the documentary

Shouting in the Dark

, which was released in 2012.

Arab Spring Timeline


Here are the key events in the Arab Spring, in chronological order:

December 17, 2010: Mohamed Bouazizi sets himself on fire outside a local government office in an act of protest after being arrested by police for not having a permit to run a vegetable stall.
Street protests begin soon after his death throughout the country.

January 14, 2011: Tunisian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali resigns and flees to Saudi Arabia.

January 25, 2011: The first coordinated mass protests are held in Tahrir Square in Cairo, Egypt.

February 2011: Protestors in several predominantly Muslim countries stage "Days of Rage" to oppose authoritarian governments and push for democratic reforms.

February 11, 2011: Egypt’s Mubarak steps down.

March 15, 2011: Pro-democracy protests begin in Syria.

May 22, 2011: Police beat thousands of pro-democracy protesters in Morocco.

July 1, 2011: Moroccan voters approve constitutional changes that limit the power of the country’s monarchy.

August 20, 2011: Rebels in Libya launch battle to take control of Tripoli.

September 23, 2011: Yemenis hold a "Million Man March," a large-scale pro-democracy protest.

October 20, 2011: Libyan dictator Colonel Muammar Qaddafi is captured by rebels, tortured and killed.

October 23, 2011: Tunisia holds first democratic parliamentary elections.

November 23, 2011: Yemen dictator Ali Abdullah Saleh signs a power-sharing agreement.
He resigns altogether in February 2012 and is later killed, in 2017, while the country is still engulfed in a civil war.

November 28, 2011: Egypt holds first democratic elections for parliament.
In June 2012, Morsi is elected president, but is removed from power by coup in July 2013.

Sources


Arab Uprisings.
BBC News.
The Arab Spring: The Uprising and Its Significance.
Trinity University.
The Arab Spring: A Year of Revolution.
NPR.
The Arab Spring: Five Years On: Amnesty International.
The Arab Spring: Six Years Later.
Huffington Post.
Bahrain: Shouting in the Dark.
Al Jazeera.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad: Facing down rebellion.
BBC.
Timeline: Arab Spring.
Al Jazeera.



####
document number 7: 
Chief Justice Adly Mansour replaces Morsi, sworn in as Egypt’s interim president


July 04, AP – The head of Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court has been sworn in as the interim president after the army ousted President Mohammed Morsi Wednesday night.
The military also suspended the Islamist-drafted constitution.


Adly Mansour, the head of the country’s Supreme Constitutional Court, has been sworn in Thursday as Egypt’s temporary head of state after the military ousted President Mohammed Morsi.

In his first remarks, Mansour praised the massive street demonstrations, that began on June 30, that led to Morsi’s ouster.
He also hailed the youth behind the protests saying they embodied "the nation’s conscience, its ambitions and hopes."

"The most glorious thing about June 30 is that it brought together everyone without discrimination or division," he said.
"I offer my greetings to the revolutionary people of Egypt."

After a 48-hour deadline for Morsi to reach a compromise deal with the opposition was met with no action by the president, the Egyptian army began its intervention solution Wednesday night.

Armed Forces Commander in Chief Abdel-Fattah al-Sissi said on national television that Mansour, would act as interim president and pledged the creation of a national unity government to serve until fresh elections could take place.
He said a "strong and capable" government would be formed that would have "full capacities."

Al-Sissi also announced the formation of a panel that would look into amendments to the constitution and a law would be drafted to regulate parliamentary elections.
The current constitution – drafted in a committee dominated by Morsi’s Islamist allies – had been suspended, he said.

Following the news, Cairo’s Tahrir Square, the centerpoint of the public protests opposing Morsi, erupted in celebration with people letting off fireworks, singing and cheering in the streets.

Muslim Brotherhood spokesman Gehad El-Haddad wrote on his Twitter feed that Morsi was placed under house arrest at the headquarters of the Republican Guard along with several other Brotherhood members.
He later said Morsi had been separated and taken to the defense ministry.

A revolution reignited

A statement on the Egyptian president’s office’s Twitter account quoted Morsi as saying that the actions of the military amounted to "a full coup."
Morsi narrowly won a presidential runoff election last June, claiming 51.7 percent of the vote and becoming Egypt’s first democratically elected president.

However, Egypt’s largely state-run press unanimously dubbed the army’s overthrow as a "legitimate" revolution.

"The people’s legitimacy was victorious," the government-owned Al-Gomhuriya said on its front page.

The headline in government-owned newspaper, Al-Ahram, read, "President ousted by revolutionary legitimacy."

State-owned Al-Akhbar said, "And the people’s revolution was victorious."

Violence was reported in several cities across Egypt overnight.
State-run newspaper Al-Ahram reported eight deaths and 343 injuries.
The Brotherhood’s El-Haddad also said on Twitter that men in plain clothes had opened fire on a group of Morsi supporters protesting against the military intervention.

Associated press journalist for human rights observers – Khizer hayat, reports from the region.

Tags: chief justice adly mansour interim president of egypt, egyptian army suspends constitution, facebook hromedia post adly mansour chief justice of supreme court takes oath as interim president, featured, hro, human rights, human rights magazine news human rights, human rights news morsi under house arrest, human rights news update adly mansour becomes interim president of egypt, human rights news update morsi under house arrest.
morsi detained adly mansour becomes interim president of egypt hromedia, interim president of egypt adly mansour, justice mansour interim presidentof egypt human rights observers, magazine, magazine human rights morsi under house arrest, magazine human rights observers adly mansour interim president of egypt, magazine news adly mansour of supreme court sworn in, news magazine egypt crisis adly mansour takes oath www.hromedia.com, observers, observers news adly mansour sworn in, observers news adly mansour takes oath, the magazine new adly mansour takes oath as interim president, the observer news morsi out adly mansour in as interim president, www.facebook.com/hromedia chief justce mansour sworn in as interim president of egypt



####
document number 8: 
The 1989 Invasion of Panama


Urban combat in Panama, 1989.


On December 20th, 1989, President Bush launched a military operation code-named "Operation Just Cause" to topple the dictatorial government of Manuel Noriega in Panama.
The invasion involved about 24,000 US troops who had orders to oust the leader and execute a warrant for his arrest on drug trafficking charges.
The US forces had the backing of well-equipped military hardware.
The military campaign was rather short as it lasted for only two months, beginning on December 20, 1989 and ended on January 31, 1990.

5.
Background


In the 1980s, Panama was a country of great significance to the US mainly due to the presence of the Panama Canal, a critical shipping route for American ships.
The Panama Canal, which had been constructed primarily by the US government, was partially under the control of the Panama government with a plan for it to be fully handed over to the Latin American country by the year 2000.
The small nation also hosted several US military bases which were strategic during the America-Russia Cold War because of Panama's relative proximity to Cuba.
The country’s president at the time was Manuel Noriega who had notably previously served as a paid informant for the Central Intelligence Agency and was of great help in the international war on the drug trade.
Noriega had facilitated the movement of weapons into Latin America in an effort to arm pro-western forces in the time of the Cold War.
George H. W. Bush has been at the head of CIA from 1976 – 1977.
Noriega had sided with the US and not the Soviet Union in Latin America.
He received more than $100,000 annually from the 1960s up to 1980s, when it was increased to $20,000.

Noriega worked closely with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to curb the illegal drug shipments.
On the other hand, he also received financial support from drug dealers and facilitated laundering drug money, because he had a special relationship with the CIA and could not be investigated by DEA.
In the 1980s, the relationship between Noriega and the US was deteriorating.
In 1986, Ronald Reagan opened negotiations urging Noriega to step down as he had been exposed publicly by the New York Times for his involvement with the illicit drug trade.
Noriega was pressured and indicted on several drug-related charges in US courts.
In 1988, a US invasion was planned, but President Reagan refused because the ties Noriega had with Bush as head of CIA, which could potentially affect Bush’s presidential campaign.
In later negotiations, the charges of drug trafficking were dropped.
In March 1988, Noriega’s forces resisted the coup attempt to topple the Panamanian government.
As the relations deteriorated further, Noriega shifted allegiance to the Soviet bloc where he received military aid from Libya, Nicaragua, and Cuba.
The US military planners started preparing plans to invade Panama.
In May 1989, Panama conducted its general elections where Noriega’s primary opponents gained majority votes only to have the government reject the results and cling to power.
Then on December 16, 1989 a convoy of US military personnel was attacked in the nation’s capital prompting President Bush to order the commencing of Operation Just Cause.

4.
Makeup


The US military was deployed to the tiny country and comprised of units from the US Army, US Air Force, The US Navy, and The US Marines.
The Panamanian Defense Forces had only 16,000 officers.
The operation involved 27,684 US troops and more than 300 aircraft, which included the C-130 Hercules tactical which was equipped with Adverse Weather Aerial Delivery System (AWADS), AC-130 Spectre gunship, C-141 Starlifter, OA-37B dragonfly observation and attack aircraft, C-5 Galaxy strategic transport, AH-64 Apache attack helicopter, and other specialized military aircraft.
Air logistics was given by the 22nd Air Force and air assistance from the 60th, 62nd, and 63rd military airlift wings.
The Panama incursion was the first combat for the AH-64 and the F-117.

3.
Description


The US military invasion began on 20th, December 1989 at 1:00 am local time.
The first course of action was to destroy all strategic installations including the Punta Paitilla Airport, Army garrisons and jamming the Panamanian radar units using EF-111As of 266th TFW and 390th ECS.
Several air assaults were critical in the capture of significant towns and cities with the deployment of paratroopers.
There were some scattered from Panamanian Defense Force (PDF).
By December 24, the PDCF had been crushed, and the US forces held most of the country.
With defeat being evident, President Noriega sought refuge in a Vatican diplomatic mission in the capital city.
However, the US forces used psychological strategies to flush him out and capture him by playing loud rock music at the diplomatic residence.
Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990 when he was captured and then flown to the US.

2.
Outcome


The war had a duration of two months and resulted in many casualties with some organizations reporting deaths of over 3,000 Panamanian civilians.
Both warring sides lost military officers with the US reporting 23 deaths from its forces and three civilians, while the Panama Defense Forces reported 150 deaths and 500 civilians.
The war also displaced many from their homes, resulting in thousands of refugees.
The European Parliament and the Organization of American States made a formal protest against the invasion and condemned it as a blatant violation of international law.
In 1992, Noriega was charged on eight counts of money laundering, racketeering, and drug trafficking.
He was found guilty and sentenced to 40 years in a federal prison, although later it was reduced to 30 years.

1.
Significance


The Invasion of Panama is considered by scholars as a precursor to the Gulf War where the US government showed the world its military capacity.
The war, while relatively short, strained diplomatic relations between the US and several Latin American nations with Peru recalling its ambassador from the US in protest.
Noriega’s case became the very first in the Jury’s history where a foreign leader was convicted of criminal charges.



####
document number 9: 
The Spy Game


For several months last year, FBI agents followed Stanislav Gusev very closely.
They weren't sure what he was doing, but they had strong suspicions that he was up to something strange.
Correspondent Jim Stewart reports on the latest chapter in the continuing spy story involving the U.S. and Russia.

Gusev had been on the radar screen since first arriving in the U.S. last spring, as a diplomat assigned to the Russian embassy.
Within months he was spotted around the State Department by a top secret group of FBI agents who work in disguise and do nothing but covert surveillance.
Agents knew that Gusev, 54, was not a diplomat, but a spy, an experienced technician with the Russian spy service.

Gusev went to the spot regularly.
He never went inside.
Sometimes, he would park his car, feed the meter, and then soon after move to another parking space further down the street.
He always showed up with a leather bag.

"I think the bag has some significance," says Neil Gallagher, the head of National Security.
"I'm confident there was more than likely a piece of equipment in the bag."

The FBI used its own high-tech equipment to see if any signals were being sent.
Agents did find signals, which led straight to the Gusev.
Gusev's Foggy Bottom strolls were apparently a search for the best spot to operate a remote-controlled listening and recording system, some of it hidden in that bag, some in his car.

But FBI agents had a problem: although they heard the signal, they had no idea where the bug itself was planted.
They knew that the signal was coming from the State Department, but could not pinpoint it.

Room by room, they swept the building - mostly at night so as not to arouse suspicions.
When they found the bug, they were shocked.
It was on the seventh floor of the State Department - down the hall from "Mahogany Row" where Secretary of State Madeline Albright and her top aides have offices.
The Russians had a listening device on the very floor where America's foreign policy is crafted.

"I think this is a huge deal," says Paul Redmond, the former head of counter-intelligence at the CIA.
"You have the apparent appalling fact that a hostile intelligence service, however they did it, put an audio device on the seventh floor, the top floor, of, in effect, our foreign ministry."

As a professional, Gallagher is impressed with the Russian work.
"Someone had to go in and take a survey, go back and have a particular device designed, and then somehow get back into State Department with the device and introduce it," he says.

"This was a very sophisticated device, technically sophisticated that was very professionally placed within the State Department."

To find the bug, the FBI used sophisticated counterintelligence technology, which sniffed out a tiny microphone and transmitter hidden inside some wooden molding in a conference room.
Investigators didn't immediately remove it for fear o blowing the Russian operation.
Instead, they waited for Gusev to return to his usual post.

They discovered that Gusev's normal parking spot gave him an excellent sight line to the bugged conference room.

According to Oleg Kalugin, a former general in the KGB, the bug installation was straight out of Russian spy manuals.

"It's the design, the camouflage are all manufactured in Moscow," Kalugin says.
"From my own experience, we would simply send a description of a specific place.
We would give the details, the size, the measurements, and everything and the color by the way, it's important to have the right tint.
If it's a mahogany, it should be mahogany.
If it's oak, it's oak.
But then in Moscow they would simply reproduce a piece of the specified measurements of the specified color and then you would have to put it underneath where ever you picked out the right place."

Agents do not yet know how the bug was actually planted.
They do not think Gusev planted it.
While being watched, he never entered the State Department.
Kalugin thinks somebody else planted the bug.

Redmond says that the State Department must tighten security.
"The State Department clearly lives in the 19th century," he says.
"They still want to believe that gentlemen don't read other gentlemen's mail."

Others also say that the State Department has loose security.
The State Department's own Inspector General found that highly classified documents were mishandled, visitors often went unescorted, and some rooms were not swept for bugs.
Top secret files - including some from the Secretary of State's own offices - mysteriously disappeared.

Two years ago security officials required all foreign visitors to have an escort inside the building.
But the higher-ups thought the new rules were a nuisance, and did away with them.

That may have been a costly mistake.
FBI and State Department sources now say they are virtually certain that Gusev's assistant - another Russian spy posing as a diplomat - may have gotten into the building, and from that point would have been allowed to walk about unescorted.

Investigators are still trying piece together what information was lost.
But officials are downplaying the breach, saying the bugged conference room belonged to the department's oceanography branch and was used mostly for low-level meetings.

Redmond, though, thinks the room may have been used for sensitive meetings.

Gallagher and his security team are in the process of identifying every meeting that occurred in the room, and are trying to crosscheck that information with time when Gusev was listening in.

On a chilly morning last December, investigators finally took out the bug.
When Gusev returned to his post, the FBI detained him, and he was ordered out of the country.
Meanwhile technicians carefully removed the conference room molding.

"From a professional standpoint I would describe it as a major feat, a coup indeed,"Kalugin says.
"From a political standpoint I think it's a blunder.
After all the United States today is a partner of Russia right?
We are no longer at war and yet what do we want to know in the State Department?
As far as I'm concerned, I do not need that.
I would not be surprised if they would concentrate on stealing technological secrets or something which would help Russia's economy."

Redmond agrees.
"If I were in Moscow, what I'd want to know is what's Microsoft going to do," he says.
"What's Sun going to do?"

Ironically, the discovery of the Gusev bug may give the United States a temporary edge in the contest.
FBI technicians will now spend months analyzing the bug, learning as much as possible about Russian spy technology.
Gallagher says the U.S. may try to create a device that can turn off the Russian bugs.

Says Gallagher: "We've probably got their attention."



####
document number 10: 
Jeff Bezos's bargain divorce: Amazon founder's wife Mackenzie settles for just 25 percent of their $144billion joint stock holding after 26 years of marriage and despite his affair with Lauren Sanchez


Jeff Bezos and his wife MacKenzie have settled their divorce - and the richest man in the world got off lightly.

Jeff, 55, will keep 75 percent of their joint $144billion Amazon stake, leaving MacKenzie with just a quarter which represents a four percent stake in the company worth $35.8billion.

Jeff's 12 percent stake is now worth around $107.5billion which allows him to retain his title as the richest man in the world.

PLAY


Top Articles by

Daily Mail

US mercenaries sentenced in Venezuela to 20 years for failed coup About Connatix V43004






Read More SPONSORED /


Coming Next Skip Ad

He will also take voting control of his ex-wife's remaining shares, and has been given her interest in The Washington Post, which he bought for $250million in 2013, and Blue Origin, his space travel company which he is currently investing in.

The pair announced the details in tweets on Thursday afternoon but offered no explanation as to why MacKenzie, who has helped build Amazon since it launched in 1994, will walk away with just half of what she is entitled to after 26 years of marriage.

The Vanguard Group is the second largest Amazon shareholder with 30million shares which represent a 5.6 percent stake in the company.

The way the divorce splits the shares, Jeff keeps more than double the second shareholder's control.

In her tweet, the 48-year-old said she was 'grateful' that the process was over and was 'excited' for the 'next phase'.
She created a Twitter account to make the announcement.

Scroll down for video


Jeff and MacKenzie Bezos settled their divorce on Thursday.
She walks away with 25 percent of their joint Amazon stake, half of what she is entitled to, worth $35billion



This was the statement Jeff issued on his account shortly after the pair reached their agreement

There was no mention of how they will divide their sprawling property portfolio or other investments, nor was there any reference to Jeff's girlfriend Lauren Sanchez.

A court approved their divorce petition after it was submitted on Thursday.

Amazon also submitted an SEC filing detailing the new shareholder breakdown.


Bezos is now one step closer to being able to resume his romance with Lauren Sanchez.
Her divorce is not yet final

In her Twitter statement, MacKenzie said: 'Grateful to have finished the process of dissolving my marriage with Jeff with support from each other and everyone who reached out to us in kindness, and looking forward to the next phase as co-parents and friends.

'Happy to be giving him all of my interest in the Washington Post and Blue Origin and 75% of our Amazon stock plus voting control of my shares to support his continued contributions with the teams of these incredible companies.

'Excited about my own plans.
Grateful for the past as I look forward to what comes next,' MacKenzie said.

In his statement, Jeff wrote: 'I'm so grateful to all my friends and family for reaching out with encouragement and love.

'It means more than you know.
MacKenzie most of all.

I'm grateful for her support and for her kindness in this process and am very much looking forward to our new relationship as friends and co-parents.

'In all our work together, MacKenzie's abilities have been on full display.

'She has been an extraordinary partner, ally and mother.

'She is resourceful and brilliant and loving and as our futures unroll, I know I'll always be learning from her.'

It was Jeff's romance with Sanchez which prompted their divorce announcement in January.

THE BEZOS DIVORCE


WHAT SHE GETS

$35, 832, 724,000 in Amazon shares

WHAT HE KEEPS

$107, 472, 168,000 in Amazon shares

The Washington Post - (Bought for $250million in 2013)

Blue Origin

WHAT IS LEFT

Homes in Seattle, Beverly Hills, Texas, Washington DC, and New York City

Advertisement

Since then, the world has waited with baited breath for the world's most expensive divorce.

While MacKenzie's shares payout is only half what she is entitled to, it is still 10 times more than the second most expensive divorce settlement in history.

She has stayed completely silence while her estranged husband battled with American Media Inc, the media company which owns The National Enquirer and exposed his affair with Sanchez, over the last few months.

According to that bombshell report, MacKenzie became suspicious about his affair with Lauren when she saw that she was the only other passenger on a flight manifest on

She has not been seen publicly since the January news broke, whereas he attended the Super Bowl and mingled at Oscars parties.
Now, Bezos is one step closer to resuming his romance with Sanchez.


Amazon detailed the new shareholder split in an SEC filing on Thursday which revealed that the divorce had been submitted and approved that day



Lauren's husband Patrick Whitesell and her son, 18-year-old Nikko Gonzalez, in Beverly Hills on Wednesday night.
They are yet to finalize their divorce.
Nikko is Lauren's son with former NFL player Tony Gonzalez


Patrick and Lauren are shown with Bezos in 2016.
He introduced his ex-wife to Bezos and they bonded over a shared love of flying


Jeff and MacKenzie Bezos are pictured in 2004, ten years after founding Amazon.
They had been married for a year when Bezos launched the company as an online bookstore

The pair have been keeping a safe distance while his negotiations with MacKenzie played out and she navigated her own divorce from her Hollywood mega agent husband Patrick Whitesell.

WHO OWNS AMAZON?


Jeff Bezos - 12 %

Vanguard - 5.8%

BlackRock - 5.1%

MacKenzie Bezos - 4%

Advertisement

Despite not spending time together in person, friends said they were still 'very much in love'.

MacKenzie and Jeff had been married for a year when he founded Amazon in 1994 as an online bookstore.

She then drove him him across the country, from their New York City home to Seattle, to attract investors.

In previous interviews, they have described how he tapped out his business plan on a laptop during that journey.

As the company grew, she worked as an accountant and helped negotiate freight deals.
She has also worked as an author.

Now, she is the third richest woman in the world and the 24th richest person in the world.

She and Bezos have four children together; three sons and a daughter they adopted from China.

MOST EXPENSIVE DIVORCE SETTLEMENTS


1.
MacKenize Bezos ($36 BILLION)

The soon to be ex-wife of Amazon founder Jeff Bezos is being rewarded for her decades of loyalty with a settlement that gives her 25 percent of the couple's Amazon stock.
Far less then the 50 percent she is legally entitled too, but far more than any other spouse has received in a divorce.
As a result, she is now the 22nd richest person in the world.
The novelist was married to Bezos for 26 years, and by his side when he launched Amazon from their garage.

2.
Jocelyn Wildenstein ($2.5 BILLION)


The Swiss-born socialite was the cat that got the milk in the years after her art dealer husband Alec paid out their record settlement.
She then managed to squander that money thanks in large part to her love for cosmetic procedures and her affinity for domesticating rare animals.
Last May, Wildenstein filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection according to federal court papers which were obtained by DailyMail.com.
It was a shocking turn of events for Wildenstein, who first became a fixture in the New York press around the time of her split as she bragged about the high costs of her lavish lifestyle and penchant for plastic surgery.Two decades later, the woman who once purchased a capuchin monkey as a pet finds herself with no checking or savings accounts, no retirement fund or pension plans and no investments according to her filing.


Anna-mosity: Rupert Murdoch poses with his wife Anna Murdoch and their children Lachlan Murdoch ,James Murdoch and Elisabeth Murdoch at their home in 1989

3.
Anna Murdoch ($1.7 BILLION)

The woman who was by Murdoch's side as he rose to the top of the media world received a small portion of his fortune after their 1999 divorce.
It was a shocking split to their children Elizabeth, Lachlan and James, especially when it was learned that their father had been having an affair with soon-to-be-fourth wife Wendi Deng.
That all came to a head at Lachlan's wedding to wife Sarah, with Anna informing her estranged husband that his new wife was not to attend the nuptials.
Deng and Murdoch married almost immediately after he finalised his divorce from his second wife.

4.
Slavica Ecclestone ($1.2 BILLION)


The Croatian model split from her business magnate beau after 23 years of marriage in 2009, and walked off with a sizable chunk of the Formula One chief's fortune.
That union lasted longer than many initially imagined it would in account of the couple's difference in age (28 years) and height (Slavica is a foot taller than Bernie).
Slavica also spoke no English, while Bernie only spoke English.
The couple welcomed two daughters during their marriage, Tamara and Petra, who have also made waves with some of the biog purchases they have made with their father's money.
Petra notably bought the former residence of Aaron and Candy Spelling in Beverly Hills, which for a time was the largest private home in the United States.
In the wake of that split, Bernie married a younger and shorter woman.

5.
Elaine Wynn ($1 BILLION)


Elaine Wynn helped her husband Steve build his empire, and she was sure to take some of it with her when she left.
Her role in the company has been vital ever since, and on Thursday she was in Massachusetts testifying about her split and why she failed to disclose a settlement her husband made with a woman who accused him of sexual assault.

6.
Sue Ann Arnall ($974.8 BILLION)


The wife of Harold Hamm is pushed out of the top five with the addition of Bezos, but still made her mark thanks to her ex-husband paying out his entire settlement in one single check.
Arnall had appealed that ruling but lost because she had cashed the check.
In a 7-2 decision, the court ruled in favor of a motion filed by Hamm, chief executive officer of oil company Continental Resources Inc, to dismiss Arnall's appeal.
Earlier that month, Arnall had cashed Hamm's check for $975 million, the vast majority of the lower court's award in the case.The majority of the justices said Arnall also took possession of the marital property awarded to her.
Those actions, the court ruled, caused her to forfeit her right to appeal the judgment.

Advertisement

linkBaseURL":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-6887349/Jeff-Bezos-settles-divorce-wife-MacKenzie.html#v-7346232274956828179","isMobile":false,"duration":47000,"src":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/video/mol/2018/03/05/7346232274956828179/1024x576_MP4_7346232274956828179.mp4","source":"CelebrityFootage","playerId":"default","title":"Jeff and MacKenzie Bezos arrive at Vanity Fair bash in 2018","preload":"none","initialVideo":true,"thumbnail":"https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/newpix/2018/03/05/16/49E33F6700000578-0-image-m-7_1520269099702.jpg","poster":"https://i.dailymail.co.uk/i/newpix/2018/03/05/16/49E33F6700000578-0-image-m-8_1520269099702.jpg","syndicationService":null,"shortURL":"https://mol.im/a/6887349#v-7346232274956828179","plugins":{"social-share":{"embedUrl":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/embed/video/1641782.html"},"autoplay-next-video":{"videos":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/1641782/related-videos.json","countdown_time":10},"ads-setup":{"videoAdServerUrl":"https://pubads.g.doubleclick.net/gampad/ads?sz=[size]=%2F424397508%2Fdm.video%2Fdm_video_news==s=1=vp=xml_vast3=1=[referrer_url]=[timestamp]","adsEnabled":true,"adsCancelTimeout":15000,"screen":{"width":636,"height":358}},"sources":{"url":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/7346232274956828179/video-sources.json"},"flyout":{"viewportOffset":0.4,"switchBack":true,"forceFlyout":{"active":true,"muted":true,"switchBack":false}},"tracking":{"channelShortName":"tvshowbiz","sponsored":false,"referenceId":1641782,"trackingType":"embedded"},"animated-preview":{"data-hd-fps":7,"displayName":null,"data-hd-frame-count":51,"frames":109,"width":636,"src":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2018/03/05/8490318928471868940/636x382_JPG-SINGLE_8490318928471868940.jpg","fps":0,"data-film":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2018/03/05/8490318928471868940/308x174_JPG_8490318928471868940.jpg","data-fps":7,"data-video":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2018/03/05/8490318928471868940/636x382_MP4_8490318928471868940.mp4","data-hd-film":"https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/preview/mol/2018/03/05/8490318928471868940/636x382_JPG-HD_8490318928471868940.jpg","data-hd-frame-width":636,"data-frame-height":172,"data-frame-width":308,"data-frame-count":51,"height":356,"data-hd-frame-height":356},"related-videos":{"videos":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/api/player/1641782/related-videos.json"}},"videoId":"7346232274956828179","descr":"Jeff Bezos and his lovely wife MacKenzie arrive at Vanity Fair Oscars bash.
Jeff looked dapper in a tux while MacKenzie dazzled in a chic red gown with a plunging neckline and form-fitting body.
","referenceId":1641782,"grapeshot":{"article":{"articleURL":"https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8570095/Jeff-Bezos-ex-wife-Mackenzie-announces-donated-1-7bn-charities-past-year.html"}}}" src="https://videos.dailymail.co.uk/video/mol/2018/03/05/7346232274956828179/640x360_MP4_7346232274956828179.mp4">




####
document number 11: 
Donetsk and Lugansk Republics Merge as “Novorossiya,” Claiming 6 Other Ukrainian Regions (Plus a “Confederate” Flag??)



International media coverage of the ongoing civil war in eastern Ukraine since the Ukrainian national elections on May 25th has been intensive and unrelenting—as it should be, for this important story.
But not every news source seems to have noticed that the self-declared "people’s republics" of Donetsk and Lugansk, in the ethnic-Russian stronghold along the border with Russia, have ratcheted up their claims to stake out a separate territory in Ukraine that is friendly to Moscow, not Kyiv or Brussels or Washington.
I present to you the Federal State of Novorossiya (

Федеративное государство Новороссия

)—

Novorossiya

being the Russian for "New Russia," as the area that is today southern Ukraine was known in Czarist times.


Pavel Gubarev (center), during the first "Donetsk Republic" putsch, in March



Just days after his May 7th release by Ukrainian authorities in a prison exchange, Pavel Gubarev, the Donetsk republic’s "people’s governor," said, in reference to the May 11th secession referenda in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts (reported on in this blog at the time), "The referendum is everything for us.
It’s our declaration of independence.
It’s the formation of a new entity—the Donetsk People’s Republic.
However, this new entity is only the first step to our forming a bigger entity, Novorossiya, in all the former southeastern Ukraine."
The Donetsk republic was declared on April 7th (as reported at the time in this blog) and the Lugansk one shortly afterward.


On May 13th, with the Donetsk People’s Republic (D.P.R.) already regarding itself as independent (though unrecognized, even by Moscow), Gubarev announced, "I, on my behalf, hereby proclaim the creation of a new political party, Novorossiya, whose head office will be in Donetsk.
The new party will be led only by those people who in this difficult time showed themselves as true patriots of their Motherland and proved themselves as true fighters and defenders of their Fatherland."


Denis Pushilin formally announcing the creation of the Federal State of Novorossiya



Then, in Donetsk, on the eve of Ukrainian national elections, 145 delegates from Donetsk, Luhansk (as the oblast is known in Ukrainian), and six other oblasts voted to enact a "unification referendum" embracing not just Donetsk and Luhansk but also Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkov, Kherson, Nikolaev, Odessa, and Zaporizhiye.
The Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol were not included because the delegates recognize them as now part of the Russian Federation.
Gubarev added that the new entity, Novorossiya, would recognize the new Ukrainian president only if Kyiv in turn recognized the D.P.R.’s independence.
The Lugansk republic has taken a similar position.


Novorossiya delegates voting on May 24th in Donetsk



To be clear: it is only in Luhansk and Donetsk that separatist rebels control territory on the ground—and even there, only in some districts.
Some argue that they really only control the array of government buildings that they have occupied, but in reality the police and other authorities have either refrained from asserting (Ukrainian) control or have switched sides.
The other six oblasts claimed are still fully governed by Kyiv.
An attempt to set up a Kharkov People’s Republic in Kharkiv (

Kharkov,

in Russian) in early April (reported at the time in this blog) was thwarted by the Ukrainian authorities, and the declaration on April 16th of an Odessa People’s Republic on April 16th (reported on at the time in this blog)—soon after renamed (as also reported here) the Odessa Republic of Novorossiya—has not been accompanied by any actual seizures, symbolic or otherwise, of reins of government (even though Odessa has been the site of some of the most serious street violence outside Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts).


This map (which is open to debate) purports to show areas of total (red) and partial (pink) separatist control in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts as of May 24th.



(Nor is it clear what the implications for Novorossiya unity are of the coup staged just within the past 24 hours by the Vostok Batallion, a militia heavily manned by well-trained Russian citizens.
This shadowy group has ejected the current D.P.R. "government" from their Donetsk headquarters.
Will there be a counter-coup?
and, if not, is the Vostok faction in favor of unification with Lugansk as well?
At this point, it is unclear.)


The triumphant Vostok Batallion today in the Donetsk Republic headquarters (New York Times photo)



The idea of Novorossiya is not new.
In late 2012, Kremlin policy experts produced a paper (discussed recently in this blog) projecting a changed Europe in the year 2035 in which the Russian Federation has annexed not just Crimea, Belarus, and slices of the Baltic States and Georgia, but also Moldova’s separatist Transnistria region and the "Donbas" and "Novorossiya" territories in the southeast of the Ukrainian mainland.
Their map (see just below) shows Novorossiya’s contours much like the Donetsk and Lugansk rebels are presenting it today.


Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, has used the imperialist term

Novorossiya

as well, mentioning in a speech that it was only a quirk of history that made the region, dominated by Russian-speakers, part of an independent Ukraine in the first place.
And as early as January of this year, this blog was reporting on ethnic-Russian nationalists in Crimea—which at that point had not yet seceded from Ukraine—calling for a similar territory to be called

Malorossiya,

or "Little Russia."
That Czarist name more properly refers to the borderlands of the Donbass and north, including Kharkiv, rather than the plains just north of Crimea.
But a map circulated at the time showed Malorossiya swallowing up much more than the less-than-half of Ukrainian territory claimed by today’s Novorossiya separatists (see map below).


What is not clear is what form this new entity of Novorossiya will take.
Is it to be a loose federation, along the lines of the "Union State" that today links Russia and Belarus—or something closer to full independence, or closer to Russian Federation membership?
That has not been clarified.
Though perhaps, for a clue, we can look to a scrawled-upon map in the office of the chairman of the D.P.R.’s Supreme Soviet (yes, sadly, it is called that), Denis Pushilin, an image which has been widely circulated on the Internet.
It shows both Crimea and a large chunk of southeastern Ukraine (more like the above Malorossiya map than the current Novorossiya one) labeled simply, "Russia":


However, Novorossiya does have a flag—or two, or three.
Earlier this year, Gubarev, on his Facebook page, solicited flag proposals from the public, resulting in an informal contest (see the web page http://novorossia.su/flag, which includes, disconcertingly, the almost-defunct ".su" domain suffix for the Soviet Union).
Here were the eleven finalists:












The last, no.
11, has circulated fairly widely on the Internet, including as the masthead image of a pro-Kremlin Facebook account with the risibly definite-article-free title "Truth about Situation in Ukraine":


This proposal (above) is simply the Russian tricolor with a cross superimposed on it.
Chillingly, the cross in question is the

Ehrenkreuz

("Honor Cross") used by Nazi Germany.
Other submissions, in particular the tricolors, echo the flags of the already-declared "people’s republics" in the region (from left to right, Donetsk, Lugansk, Kharkov, and Odessa):





This is especially true of another Novorossiya flag which has been seen around lately, which seems to be a modification of the Russian tricolor with Ukraine’s blue and yellow and, like the "people’s republic" flags, features a double-headed eagle from the Russian Empire’s (and post-Soviet Russia’s) coat-of-arms:


A flag enthusiast and blogger named "Arcktick," who opposes Ukraine’s disintegration, offers a deconstruction of this submission which is almost dizzyingly talmudic.
It involves taking the average of the most common colors in Ukrainian oblast flags and finding the most felicitous arrangement.
Interestingly, it resembles most closely a former flag of the Kingdom of the Netherlands—


—(with orange of course corresponding to Protestantism and the House of Orange), which is ironic given one version of the origin of the Russian tricolor, which is that it modeled itself on the flag of the Netherlands, that being the nationality of an engineer aboard the first Russian naval vessel, in the 17th century.
The modern Dutch national flag is the same as Russia’s current one, with the stripes rearranged:


To no one’s surprise, the winning entry in the contest uses the Russian colors of red, white, and blue, which are also the colors, for example, of the post-Soviet (and also post-annexation) flag of Crimea—


—which merely transposes the top two stripes and expands the now-centered white one.
The first inkling of what this Novorossiya flag would look like was on Gubarev’s Facebook page in December 2013, though without a caption:


A photo of an apparent official unveiling of this flag (with slightly different tints) appeared in the online magazine

Ukrainian Policy,

though I have not been able to confirm the source of the photo:


The Novorossiya flag (with the Donetsk People’s Militia emblem below it)



However, it is the flag emblazoned, on the masthead and then again in the coat-of-arms, on the front page of the first page of the Novorossiya political party’s newspaper, also called

Novorossiya

:


As American readers may have noted, this is nearly identical to the frequently seen battle flag of the Confederate States of America from the period of the American Civil War (not the C.S.A.’s national "Stars and Bars" flag, incidentally—which is less commonly seen today—


—but the flag most commonly used today used to invoke Confederate heritage or sympathies—


—which is actually a variation on several C.S.A. member states’ battle flags).
The only difference, other than variations in proportions and shading, is the presence of stars in the Confederate version, which are lacking in the Novorossiya flag.
Could the Ukrainian separatists be invoking the rebelliousness, the David-and-Goliath courage, or the sheer anti–United States sentiment of the original Confederacy?
Indeed, the geographical contours of these two southerly separatist movements are surprisingly similar:

(A further parallel—depending on how far one wants to take this—is that the original Southern U.S. secessionist movement, along with its modern, fringe-politics remnant, emphasizes the supposedly more "English" and "Celtic" nature of Southern white culture, as opposed to the (immigrant-"contaminated") "Yankee" culture.
The modern, white-supremacist League of the South (L.S.
), which uses the Confederate battle flag (above) as its "national" flag, even uses British spellings such as

colour

and

organisation,

thus rejecting the American spelling reforms of the Connecticut-born Yankee traitor Noah Webster.
Like the Russian ultranationalists in eastern Ukraine, the L.S.
rejects the central government (in Kyiv, rather than Washington) in light of perceived cultural and historical commonalities with the "mother country."
The fact that the Confederate "Stars and Bars" and battle flags more closely resemble the Union Jack (see below for more discussion of the Union Jack) than they do the U.S. "Stars and Stripes" is a further reflection of this.)


Some Southern nationalists in the U.S. use a black-and-white version of the St.
Andrew’s Cross, (more on that below) with visual resonance of the flags of both Scotland and Alabama.



But back to the Novorossiya flag—despite a resemblance to the Confederate flag, a more immediate and likely origin for the design is that it is based on the Russian naval ensign, in use since 1712:


This uses the St.
Andrew’s cross (saltire)—which is also the flag of Scotland—and St.
George’s Cross—also the flag of England—which are also ingredients of the United Kingdom’s national flag, the Union Jack:


SS.
George and Andrew were both prominent patron saints in the Russian Empire, as they have long been in the British Empire.
In fact, the St.
George’s Cross shows up in the flag of the formerly-Soviet Republic of Georgia (the patron saint of Georgia being, naturally, George)—


(incidentally, those are Jerusalem crosses, not Nazi

Ehrenkreuzen

!
)—and the flag of the Black Sea Fleet, which Russia captured, in violation of an earlier treaty, when it annexed Crimea, is merely that of Scotland with the colors reversed (see below, on the right, amid the Russian flags):


(In fact, in the contest entries shown above, St.
Andrew’s–type saltires are almost as common as Czarist coats-of-arms.)
And of course the history of naval power in the Czarist empire has been an important historical, geopolitical, and symbolic rallying point in southeastern Ukraine’s pro-Russian rebellion.


The D.P.R. foreign minister, Yekaterina Gubareva, in front of Slovyansk municipal flags, wears the Soviet-era "St.
George’s Ribbon," which has become a symbol of pro-Russian separatism in Ukraine.



First we will have to see whether the next weeks and months will spell the demise of the Donetsk and Lugansk republics and their reabsorption into a Ukraine.
If they survive, in whatever form, they may likely do so as a new (and old) entity called Novorossiya.


[You can read more about Novorossiya and many other separatist and new-nation movements, both famous and obscure, in my new book, a sort of encyclopedic atlas just published by Litwin Books under the title

Let’s Split!
A Complete Guide to Separatist Movements and Aspirant Nations, from Abkhazia to Zanzibar.

The book, which contains 46 maps and 554 flags (or, more accurately, 554 flag

images

), is available for order

now

on Amazon.
Meanwhile, please "like" the book (even if you haven’t read it yet) on Facebook and see this interview for more information on the book.]


Thanks are due to Stanislav Zamyatin and Szymon Pawlas, of the Facebook group "Flags of the World," for alerting me to some of the vexillological information.



####
document number 12: 
Safeguarding Sudan’s Revolution







Sudanese civilians ride on the train to join in the celebrations of the signing of the Sudan's power sharing deal, that paves the way for a transitional governmentand eventually elections, following the overthrow of long-time leader Omar al-Bashir.




What’s new?
Since Omar al-Bashir’s 11 April ouster, Sudan’s military leadership and opposition alliance have appointed a new prime minister, formed a cabinet and assembled a supervisory council to oversee a power-sharing deal concluded on 17 August.
If honoured, the deal could pave the way for elections and civilian rule.

Why does it matter?
Sudan faces a crushing economic crisis, insurgencies and political polarisation, with a security establishment bent on keeping power and an opposition movement determined to instal a fully civilian administration.
The 17 August agreement represents the best pathway both to achieving reform and to averting spiralling violence.

What should be done?
The AU, U.S. and EU, together with Gulf states, should push the generals to respect the power-sharing deal.
They should encourage Khartoum to make peace with insurgents in peripheral areas.
The U.S. should rescind Sudan’s state sponsor of terrorism designation while maintaining pressure on the military in other ways.

Sudan has swung between hope and despair since 11 April, when the most sustained civilian protest movement in the country’s modern history swept Omar al-Bashir from power.
Many Sudanese celebrated Bashir’s ouster, seeing him as responsible for economic ruin and severe rights abuses.
But the generals who sought to placate the demonstrators by deposing Bashir have shown reluctance to cede power.
The security forces’ brutal 3 June attack on protesters in Khartoum repulsed the world and galvanised support for mediation that yielded a power-sharing agreement on 17 August.
Still, more outside support is needed to keep the transition on track.
The African Union (AU) should appoint an envoy to help bridge the gap of mistrust between parties.
For their part, Western powers should signal willingness to open the taps of badly needed financial support, encourage Khartoum to make peace with rebel factions on Sudan’s periphery, and sustain pressure on the generals’ Gulf allies to ensure that all sides abide by the deal Sudan needs to move ahead after Bashir’s rule.

In Sudan’s lopsided, patronage-driven economy, the top brass has a clear interest in clinging to political power.

There have been encouraging steps since the military leadership and civilian opposition signed a constitutional declaration sealing the power-sharing agreement at a ceremony by the Nile in Khartoum.
The parties named representatives to an eleven-member sovereign council that is to steer the country to free elections over the 39 months following 17 August.
A widely respected economist, Abdalla Hamdok, became prime minister four days after the ceremony, and a new cabinet took office on 8 September.
But the generals continue to wield enormous influence, and they have shown few signs that they intend to respect the Sudanese people’s demand for a civilian-led administration.
In Sudan’s lopsided, patronage-driven economy, the top brass has a clear interest in clinging to political power.

That is just one challenge among many.
In addition to being a potential spoiler, the security establishment is fragmented, unaccountable and subject to dangerous internecine rivalries.
The once-dominant army has lost its primacy to the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary group formed from the remnants of the Janjaweed militia of Darfur infamy and run by Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo "Hemedti", who may be the most powerful man in Sudan.
The country’s primary military and paramilitary organisations should be unified under one command, but that project will require patience and encouragement from outside powers like Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Forcing the issue could result in confrontation at a time when the last thing Sudan needs is more conflict.

Then there is the challenge of maintaining the unity of the extraordinarily broad civilian coalition – named the Forces for Freedom and Change – that has been at the vanguard of the uprising.
Comprising professional associations, civil society groups, unions, political parties and armed groups, the coalition has had its own internal struggles.
It will need to deftly manage them lest the security establishment use fissures in its unity to peel off constituents and weaken it politically.

There are also wars on the country’s periphery – in the Blue Nile, Kordofan and Darfur regions – that tear at national cohesion.
The transitional government should focus on ending these conflicts.

Yet for all the challenges standing in Sudan’s transitional path, there are reasons for hope.
For one thing, the protest movement’s strength and increasing sophistication set it apart from anything in the country’s recent history.
The generals have already seen that strong-arm tactics of the sort used to quell prior movements – for example in 2013 – are not likely to work here.
For another thing, a botched transition could stymie prospects for a surge of desperately needed international support and investment in Sudan’s flailing economy.
That is an outcome for which the security forces will almost certainly not wish to be blamed.

Against this backdrop, there is a good deal that outside actors – including African powers, Khartoum’s backers in the Gulf, Western states and multilateral organisations – can do to help the power-sharing arrangements succeed and nudge Sudan along the path of transition.

Diplomatically, regional actors (especially Ethiopia and the AU) played a key role in unlocking talks after the 3 June massacre and should continue to stay closely involved.
The AU should dispatch to Khartoum an envoy to support the transition by mediating between the two sides and helping guard against the possibility that the security establishment (with all its structural advantages) will steamroll the civilian opposition if there are disputes over the deal’s details.
The deal will be all the stronger if Western powers, including the U.S., keep up the pressure to honour it and press Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Egypt – all with close ties to the generals in Khartoum – to do the same.

There is also much to do on the economic front.
Rescuing Sudan’s anaemic economy will require broad international support through a major multilateral donor initiative.
Hamdok has estimated that the country needs a $10 billion infusion over the next two years.
Donors, including the U.S., the EU and its member states, and Gulf countries, should begin taking steps to support this request.
The U.S. should also move expeditiously to rescind Sudan’s designation as a state sponsor of terrorism, which forbids international financial institutions from issuing loans and impedes other foreign investment, thereby hobbling Sudan’s private sector.
Lifting the designation would help the newly appointed, civilian-led cabinet by giving it an early win and would be an important step toward Sudan’s qualifying for debt relief.
External partners should couple these supportive measures with stern warnings that spoilers in Khartoum who impede the economic and political reforms necessary for Sudan’s successful transition will be subject to targeted sanctions on the part of the AU, EU and U.S.

Sudan is one of Africa’s most important countries, sandwiched between two major powers, Ethiopia and Egypt, abutting the Red Sea and located in a region scarred by instability.
The benefits of a successful transition are potentially enormous, and the cost of state failure would be vast.
Until recently, it was hard to imagine a moment of opportunity like the country now faces.
It would be a mistake to squander it.

Khartoum/Addis Ababa/Nairobi/Abu Dhabi/Brussels, 21 October 2019





Murithi Mutiga, Crisis Group's Project Director for the Horn of Africa, reflects on the Sudanese revolution and on the challenges lying ahead for the new civilian-led administration in Khartoum.


Loading Video


Mass protests and a military coup have ended the 30-year dictatorship of Omar al-Bashir.
The same events have also released centrifugal forces in Sudan that could spark renewed violence if not contained by a coherent transition to civilian rule.
The civilian opposition that mobilised in the street yearns to bulldoze the former president’s corrupt, repressive legacy and hold fair elections.
But the security establishment, dominated by paramilitary forces once at the vanguard of state-sponsored slaughter in the Darfur region, now controls government arsenals as well as the country’s major revenue streams.
It is disinclined to relinquish these assets; thus, it could stymie reform.
The generals continue to receive backing from powerful Gulf monarchies and Egypt, which view them as a bastion of stability in the Horn of Africa and a source of manpower for military ventures in Yemen.

Negotiations between the civilian opposition and a military council representing the security establishment over a transitional agreement were fraught with tensions over the division of power.
The standoff culminated in a violent crackdown on 3 June, when paramilitary forces killed up to 120 protesters in the capital Khartoum.
The killings met with international opprobrium, with the UN and African Union (AU) issuing swift condemnations and the AU suspending Sudan’s membership.
The U.S., EU and UK then engaged with the Gulf states and Egypt, which corralled the junta into signing a power-sharing agreement on 17 July and accepting a constitutional declaration that was formally adopted one month later on 17 August.

The deal contemplates a transition to elections at the close of a 39-month period of reforms overseen by a civilian-dominated cabinet and legislature.
It also lays out the terms for forming the institutions that will see the country through the coming period.

At the centre of the arrangements is a "sovereign council" tasked with steering the transition, which consists of five opposition representatives, five members picked by the security forces and a civilian jointly nominated by both parties.
The Council moved swiftly to name a prime minister – economist Abdalla Hamdok – and a cabinet (with the military assigning the interior and defence portfolios).
The cabinet will report to a legislative council, two thirds of which the civilian opposition will appoint, and which is expected to fashion a constitution pending elections.
A general will head the sovereign council for the first 21 months of the transition before handing it over to a civilian for the remaining eighteen months pending elections.

But while critically important to guiding the country through a smooth transition, the deal reached over the summer goes only so far toward addressing some of the country’s most pressing needs.
These include the urgent task of transforming a deeply dysfunctional economy and bringing an end to long-running rebellions in areas that Khartoum has historically neglected.
The country’s bloated and fissiparous security machinery is a near-fatal drag on the state and needs restructuring.
Meanwhile, segments of the army and security services appear to resent the more powerful paramilitaries, which could easily spark feuding among the generals themselves.

This report describes Bashir’s fall from power, the power-sharing deal’s emergence and the challenges that Sudan’s transitional leadership will face.
It argues that the deal offers the best – and only viable – framework for addressing these challenges, steering the country toward reform, and avoiding the very real possibility that the country is instead pulled toward spiralling violence.
It is based on interviews conducted since January in Khartoum, Addis Ababa, Abu Dhabi, Washington, Brussels, London, Nairobi, New York and Juba.
It also builds on Crisis Group’s past work on Sudan’s long-term crisis.

Unlike many of his peers, Omar al-Bashir survived the 2011 Arab uprisings relatively unscathed.
It was subsequent setbacks that caused his eventual fall: an economic slump; the ensuing street protests in regime strongholds, including across Khartoum; the alienation of core constituencies, including within a regime security architecture beset by schisms between the armed forces and paramilitary units; and eroding support from sponsors in the Gulf.

The spark for the revolution was a rapidly declining economy.
Bashir had maintained his power by repressing political opposition, fighting costly counter-insurgencies in peripheral areas and underwriting his factious security sector with patronage-driven expenditures that ate up, by some estimates, 70 per cent of the national budget.
By late 2018, the economy had plunged to new depths, due to mismanagement, corruption and the loss of revenue following the secession of oil-rich South Sudan in 2011.
While, in 2017, the U.S. eased some financial and economic sanctions, the impact was modest; because Washington did not lift Sudan’s designation as a State Sponsor of Terrorism, the country remained off limits to many foreign investors.

Protests began in the south-eastern cities of Damazin and Sennar on 13 December 2018 over the tripling of bread prices and rising cost of other staples, as well as shortages of medicine, fuel and cash.
Many ATMs in banks had run dry, and queues at petrol stations stretched for kilometres.
Opposition parties, professional associations and unions marched and staged strikes.
By 19 December, when the snowballing demonstrations reached Atbara, a railway town and historic bastion of unionism in River Nile state, protesters were demanding regime change.

Several factors contributed to the movement’s strength.
Previous protests centred in Khartoum, for instance in 2011 and 2013, had struggled to expand beyond student and middle-class youth activist circles.
By contrast, the December demonstrations erupted outside the capital and leapt across geographic and class divides.
These new protests were also better organised through neighbourhood resistance committees that had learned from the failures of the 2013 protests, which Bashir’s forces put down with brute force, taking dozens of lives.

Of crucial significance throughout the rise of the movement was the participation of Sudanese women, whose position in society had suffered under Bashir’s brand of Islamist rule.
At several points during the uprising, women outnumbered men at protests.
Mainstream interest in women’s roles in the uprising surged when a photograph depicting Alaa Salah, a university student, standing on a car, dressed in a traditional white

toub

and leading chants, went viral.

The Sudanese Professionals Association (SPA), a grouping of labour and trade organisations formed in 2014, provided the movement’s backbone.
By bringing workers and professionals into the streets, the association evoked memories of previous popular uprisings in 1964 and 1985, also led by trade unionists.
Soon, the protests spread into affluent parts of Khartoum, where government officials live.
Anecdotes abound of the Khartoum elite’s sons and daughters joining the demonstrations.

On 1 January 2019, the SPA struck an alliance with 21 other organisations in a joint declaration calling for a national transitional government to replace Bashir.
The declaration marked the birth of the Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC) opposition coalition, which became the protest movement’s official voice.

As pressure mounted, Salah Gosh, chief of the National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS), held a meeting on 22 February 2019 with select newspaper editors and reporters to inform them that Bashir would no longer be head of the ruling National Congress Party (NCP).
He also said Bashir would not run in the 2020 election and that the president would dissolve the government, form a new administration composed of technocrats and launch a national dialogue to address Sudan’s challenges.
Officials leaked details of Gosh’s discussion with the journalists shortly after the meeting.
Some Sudanese rejoiced, hoping that Bashir would indeed engineer a transition and leave office.

But when Bashir spoke later that day, he instead proclaimed a state of emergency, installed military officers as governors of Sudan’s eighteen states and announced his second cabinet reshuffle in six months.
Bashir also formed a security committee composed of loyalists – though many would later turn against him.
Among its members were senior officers from the Sudanese Armed Forces; General Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo (known as Hemedti), leader of the RSF, the paramilitary group that Bashir increasingly relied upon as a praetorian guard; NISS officials including Gosh, whom Bashir was still keeping close; and a police representative.
But the divergence between what Gosh had told the journalists and what Bashir defiantly announced highlighted fissures within the regime.
Despite his position on the committee, ruling party figures say, Gosh soon began working in earnest to oust Bashir.

Amid these brewing tensions, public unrest put the cohesion of Bashir’s security committee to the test.
By April, managing the daily protests had depleted state funds: the treasury had to cover four months of overtime costs for police and other security agencies.
Meanwhile, inflation surged to as high as 70 per cent, emptying the pocketbooks of ordinary Sudanese.
Sensing the regime’s weakness, the protest movement dialled up the pressure, calling for larger and more audacious street actions.
On 6 April, protesters marched to army headquarters in Khartoum, as well as to military installations in other cities, and staged a sit-in.
Riot police and personnel from the intelligence services were poised to block the protesters’ advance, a source told Crisis Group, but elements of the security forces led by Gosh held them back.

At this point, Bashir still appeared confident that he could ride out the uprising.
While he remained an international pariah – the only sitting head of state ever indicted by the International Criminal Court – he had developed important security and economic partnerships with Gulf states and Turkey, which he may have believed would help him hang on to power.

As Crisis Group has described elsewhere, starting in 2013, the Gulf Cooperation Council developed a common policy of bringing Sudan closer into its orbit.
The primary motivation was to peel Khartoum away from arch-rival Tehran.
When the Saudi-led coalition launched its campaign in Yemen in 2015, its interest in the partnership intensified, as Sudan was possessed of both potential troops for the venture and a long Red Sea coastline that the coalition wanted, for strategic reasons, to ensure was in friendly hands.

For Bashir, the Saudi-led campaign in Yemen presented an opportunity.
In 2015, short on cash and eager for sanctions relief, he sought to solidify his alliance with Riyadh and Abu Dhabi by deploying roughly 10,000 RSF members and some regular army soldiers to fight alongside Saudi and Emirati troops.
A year later, Bashir severed ties with the Saudis’ nemesis Iran after protesters attacked the Saudi embassy and consulate in Tehran and Mashhad.
Riyadh, meanwhile, worked to keep Sudan on its side with cash and diplomatic support.

But Bashir’s relationship with the Gulf powers was nevertheless on less than firm ground.
For one thing, the Saudis and Emiratis harboured suspicions of Bashir, who maintained relations with their rivals Qatar and Turkey.
Bashir also alienated Riyadh and Abu Dhabi with his refusal to purge Islamists from his political machinery, security services and state bureaucracy.
From the moment Bashir took power in 1989, Egyptian authorities, later joined by Cairo’s allies in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi, were spooked by the Islamist bent of his administration and his ties to the Muslim Brotherhood, a group that Egypt’s security establishment considers its most potent domestic challenger and that the United Arab Emirates (UAE) views as a regional threat.

Fundamentally, Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo simply did not trust Bashir, whom they saw as highly transactional, requiring constant cultivation and forever at risk of sliding back in Tehran’s direction.
As Bashir’s grasp on power began to slip, the Gulf monarchies saw an opening to replace him with someone more reliable and gave their blessing to the generals planning to move against him.
A contact who was one of the last people to speak with Bashir before he was toppled said the president blamed Saudi Arabia and the UAE for his ouster.

The coup against Bashir came quickly and decisively.
When Hemedti, the RSF leader, turned against Bashir in the first week of April – as the protesters’ encampment outside military headquarters swelled – the balance of power tipped for good.
On 10 April, Bashir’s security committee made the decision to oust the strongman.
A member later reported that the committee deliberated for one hour, then disconnected Bashir’s phone and replaced his bodyguards.
A period of uncertainty followed as the generals, now a junta, worked to consolidate power.
Army officers arrived at the state television and radio stations just after 3am on 11 April, but it was another twelve hours before Lieutenant-General Ahmed Awad Ibn Ouf, Bashir’s first vice president, appeared to announce the president’s arrest and declare a state of emergency.

Ibn Ouf’s stint in power lasted only a day.
On 12 April, he appeared on television again to announce that he was stepping aside to make way for General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, an obscure figure who had overseen Sudan’s deployment to Yemen.
Before his promotion to army inspector general in February 2019, Burhan had served as the military attaché in China.
Many believe it was Hemedti who forced Ibn Ouf’s resignation, partly because he harboured his own ambitions for supremacy and saw the installation of the more pliant Burhan as a way to expand his own influence.

Ibn Ouf’s removal gave confidence to the protesters, who chanted "it fell once, it fell twice, it could fall a third time".
Within a few days, they began agitating against Burhan.
Under pressure to contain the revolt, the junta, now calling itself the Transitional Military Council, embarked on negotiations with the opposition coalition.
The two sides announced a framework on 15 May for a three-year transitional government to steer the country to elections and also agreed on mandates for the council of ministers, the legislature and a "sovereign council" to guide the transition.

The talks exposed divisions in the military council between hardliners and others willing to compromise.
Some of the council grumbled that the deal conceded too much without giving the security establishment sufficient protection from an opposition-controlled legislature.
A day later, on 16 May, the Transitional Military Council suspended the talks with the opposition coalition, instead making a show of meeting with less significant political parties.
Undeterred, the coalition stepped up the pressure.
On 28 and 29 May, the opposition alliance, pushed by elements such as the Communist Party, organised a general strike that shut down much of the country.

The standoff continued until 3 June, when security forces brutally dispersed the ten-week sit-in that had formed outside army headquarters on 6 April.
Opposition medics and media outlets documented that the raid killed up to 120 people.
In the days following the massacre, forces roamed the streets assaulting civilians and looting – an extraordinary breakdown of order in Khartoum.
Video and eyewitness testimony pin the bulk of the attack on Hemedti’s RSF, though other security forces appear to have taken part.
The massacre took place days after Hemedti visited the Saudi crown prince as well as leaders in Cairo and Abu Dhabi.

The bloody 3 June crackdown marked a turning point.
The attack, coupled with a string of arrests, a total shutdown of the internet and a ban on public events, served to re-energise and reunify the opposition alliance.
Indignant that the top brass appeared intent on clinging to power following Bashir’s fall, and outraged by not only the massacre but also a number of other smaller-scale killings of protesters, the opposition marshalled tens of thousands of Sudanese across the country for a "million-man" march on 30 June.

At the same time, the 3 June massacre provoked ire across the region and around the world.
The UN, the EU and AU, as well as various governments – including the U.S., UK and Germany – immediately issued calls for a transition to civilian rule.
The AU’s Peace and Security Council suspended Sudan’s membership in an unambiguous show of condemnation.
The U.S. also piled pressure on Gulf powers to lean on the junta to reach an accommodation with the protesters.
In a rare move, on 4 June, the U.S. State Department issued a readout of a call between Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Hale and Saudi Deputy Defence Minister Khaled bin Salman to discuss "the brutal crackdown against peaceful protesters [by the generals]".
The American asked the Saudis to use their influence with the junta to "encourage a transition to a civilian-led government in accordance with the will of the Sudanese people".

This combination of diplomatic pressure and internal protest – particularly the 30 June march – proved critical in drawing the generals back to the negotiating table.
The scale of the 30 June demonstration was especially important in making clear to the military council that this situation would not be a reprise of 2013 – when the Bashir government squashed a protest movement in part with promises of a national dialogue that never came to pass; the 2019 movement was simply too strong.
In July, the junta resumed direct talks with the opposition under the aegis of the AU and a special envoy designated by the Ethiopian prime minister, Abiy Ahmed.
By 17 July the two sides had endorsed what they described as a "political agreement" that would be followed by a formal "constitutional declaration" signed a month later on 17 August.
The power-sharing deal reached over the course of the summer laid out a blueprint for the transitional government and a roadmap for a 39-month transition to elections.
Still, many fault lines remained both between the parties involved in the agreement and within their respective ranks.

The Transitional Military Council that ousted Bashir was an awkward alliance of the competing security forces the deposed president left behind.
Under the terms of the power-sharing deal, it dissolved and ceded its authority on 21 August to an eleven-member "sovereign council" that comprises five members each from the security sector and the opposition, with one consensus civilian appointee, and is headed by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan.
Much of the day-to-day responsibility for running the country has already passed to Prime Minister Hamdok and his cabinet, which manage the civil service, draw up the budget and oversee all state agencies outside the security sector.

In practice, however, and though the civilian-led cabinet has wide popular support, the security establishment continues to hold most instruments of raw power in the country.
It has control of the streets, a grip on Sudan’s illicit economy, and political and financial backing from foreign capitals, principally Riyadh and Abu Dhabi.

This establishment is far from being a cohesive body.
At its core, it comprises the Sudanese Armed Forces, Hemedti’s RSF, the intelligence services and allied militias.
It is vulnerable to internecine rivalries.
Its constituent parts have their own loyalties and political backgrounds.
Against this backdrop, the security sector represents a dual threat to the peace process.
It is, first and foremost, a spoiler that may try to block civilian oversight of the transitional government in order to preserve the extensive prerogatives it enjoyed under Bashir and has not yet been forced to yield.
Additionally, its internal divisions could spur instability if they blow up into armed clashes.

Sudan’s professional military weakened so drastically under Bashir that it is now just one power among many in the security sector.
The reasons for the Sudanese Armed Forces’ decline are many.
Bashir lost trust in the military following his 1999 falling-out with Hassan al-Turabi, Sudan’s leading Islamist, who had hand-picked much of the top brass.
Bashir’s suspicion of the generals hardened after the military failed to prevent the stunning assault on Khartoum by the Darfuri rebel Justice and Equality Movement in 2008.
Also, the lengthy insurgencies in Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile largely precluded the army from recruiting soldiers from those regions, eroding its claim to be a unifying national institution.

Rather than rebuild the military, Bashir increasingly opted to fund and arm local paramilitary groups, leading to the proliferation of groups such as Hemedti’s RSF, which, as discussed below, started out in Darfur and has grown more powerful than the army itself.

General al-Burhan, now head of the Sovereign Council, was a little known but senior officer.
In his current role, he acts as a bridge between the Sudanese Armed Forces and Hemedti, who was his deputy on the Transitional Military Council.
Like most high-ranking army officers, Burhan is from central Sudan, the bastion of Sudan’s political elite, in contrast to Hemedti, who comes from Darfur.

Burhan has broadly aligned the army with the RSF.
He is a known figure to the security forces of the junta’s two Gulf allies, the Saudis and Emiratis, due to his role as a commander in the Yemen campaign, to which Hemedti has also contributed men and resources.
Additionally, as a professional officer, Burhan is acceptable to Cairo, which wants to make sure that the military establishment, rather than Hemedti and others whose power derives from militias, is in charge in Khartoum.

Notwithstanding Burhan’s position atop the Sovereign Council, many in the army resent what they see as Hemedti’s increasing dominance.
They also take exception to the lucre that the RSF gleans from smuggling across Sudan’s borders (which the RSF controls), the artisanal gold market (which the RSF has cornered) and its position as the primary conduit of support from Sudan’s allies in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi.
Some of the army’s generals also have illicit sources of income, due to their privileges in a country where corruption is rampant, but in recent years the RSF have become the main actor in a rigged economy.
Many in the armed forces see the RSF as an ill-trained, undisciplined provincial militia.

The army’s rank and file have also had a different perspective on the protest movement than their counterparts in the RSF and intelligence services.
From the beginning of the uprising, many low- and mid-ranking members of the armed forces seemed to share some of the protest movement’s grievances – especially with respect to the collapsing economy – and to have more sympathy for the movement’s demands.
In contrast to the RSF and intelligence services, which were persistently brutal in their treatment of protesters until their leaders shifted their stance in April, members of the armed forces sometimes sought to shield the protesters from harm.

Some within the armed forces would like to restore the military’s prestige and dominance.
Hemedti, however, resisted suggestions by army generals during negotiations leading up to the power-sharing deal that the constitutional declaration outline the need to unify Sudan’s security forces.
For now, the military and RSF maintain an awkward alliance; however, as the transition progresses and with Hemedti seemingly intent on entrenching the RSF’s position and acquiring greater political power, some military officials could seek to halt his rise, which would likely trigger clashes between two powerful and well-armed organisations.

General Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo, known as "Hemedti", the boyish head of the RSF, is the most powerful man in the security forces.
Hemedti draws his strength from three primary sources.
First, he directly oversees much of the RSF, the pre-eminent paramilitary force among the many that Sudanese authorities spawned during Bashir’s three decades in power.
The RSF now appears to control Khartoum, as well as other towns and regions of the country, notably Darfur.
Secondly, he has acquired significant wealth, including proceeds derived from stakes in major gold mining operations, which he wields to extend his power and influence in Sudan’s transactional politics.
Thirdly, he has curried favour with Riyadh and Abu Dhabi, which see him as an accommodating strongman who – unlike Bashir – can be relied upon to serve as a bulwark against Islamist sympathisers in the military and bureaucracy.

Hemedti’s rise exemplifies the proliferation of non-conventional security "entrepreneurs" who have eclipsed Sudan’s conventional military.
Born to Chadian migrants, Hemedti dropped out of primary school but thrived as a trader.
The Darfur conflict gave him his entrance into Sudan’s power politics.
He joined the Janjaweed militia, then led by Musa Hilal, his maternal cousin and a prominent leader of the Mahamid tribe, a sub-group of the Rizeigat.
In 2009, Hemedti received his first government post as a security adviser to the governor of South Darfur.
There he served until 2011, when Bashir helped him set up the RSF, a rebranding of the Janjaweed.

Hemedti benefited when Bashir tapped him to take down Musa Hilal, whom the president judged disloyal.
The Hemedti-Hilal conflict escalated to armed clashes in 2017, with Hemedti coming out on top.
Hilal was arrested and imprisoned by state authorities.
As Hilal’s fortunes declined, Hemedti took control of the lucrative gold mine they once jointly controlled.

Hemedti has thrived as a businessman, establishing several companies under the umbrella of his al-Junaid conglomerate.
His company, al-Junaid for Roads and Bridges, was awarded government contracts to help build at least three highways in Darfur (the Nyala-Fashir, Kutum-Fashir and Genina-Zalingei routes).
His mining company operates in Jebel Amir and has started working in southern Darfur.

Bashir’s 2015 decision to send troops to fight under the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen provided Hemedti with a major boost.
He sent troops in much larger numbers than Sudan’s regular military did.
RSF troops also took more front-line positions than the military’s rank and file, who are generally more risk-averse and therefore often deployed defensively, such as to guard the Saudi Arabian border.
The RSF’s ranks were swelled by recruits from many impoverished families who were highly motivated by the financial rewards, which could reach up to $10,000 each per offensive deployment.
Some even paid bribes to go.
Apart from his role in the Yemen campaign, Hemedti has authorised a representative to forge an alliance with the UAE’s ally General Khalifa Haftar in Libya.
Some diplomats, inside and outside the region, express concern that Abu Dhabi is cultivating Hemedti as a long-term security partner.

In early 2017, Sudan’s parliament passed the Rapid Support Forces Act, which put the paramilitaries directly under the office of the president, cementing their evolution from peripheral militia to quasi-presidential guard.
Bashir began referring to Hemedti as Hemayti, which translates from Arabic as "my protection".
In the end, however, when Bashir’s fortunes had begun to shift dramatically, Hemedti turned on his patron, sealing the former president’s fate.

Hemedti’s ambitions for power and influence have led him to cultivate relationships well outside Sudan’s borders.
Conspicuously, the RSF’s ranks feature men who are not Sudanese nationals.
Meanwhile, Hemedti, whose Arab tribe straddles the border between Chad and Sudan, has used his ancestry to forge links to eastern Chad, as well as circles of power in N’djamena.
He also maintains ties with armed groups in the Central African Republic.
South Sudan’s rebel leader Riek Machar, hosted by authorities in Khartoum, has also attempted to build ties with Hemedti and travelled with him for talks with President Salva Kiir in September.

While Hemedti lacks Bashir’s charisma and is considered a thuggish provincial warlord by Khartoum’s elites, he has played his distance from those elites to his advantage.
He has fashioned a role for himself as a champion of Sudanese outside the country’s relatively prosperous centre, seeking to portray the opposition alliance and the military as overly focused on concentrating power in Khartoum and the Nile valley.
He has also presented himself as the key figure seeking to end the communal conflicts that have ravaged Sudan’s eastern and western peripheries.
While in some ways a remarkable role for Hemedti to assume, given that earlier in his career he led militias accused of perpetrating some of the worst killings in Darfur, it allows him to trade on the close ties he reportedly enjoys with several armed groups.

The economic, military and diplomatic clout Hemedti has amassed is formidable.
"He almost doesn’t need to carry out a coup because he has created a role for himself as an alternative to the state and to Khartoum’s elites", one diplomat who recently spent time in Khartoum told Crisis Group.

Until the past decade, the National Intelligence and Security Services were a pillar of Bashir’s rule.
Its members are primarily drawn from Bashir’s riverine stronghold and were viewed as more loyal than the army’s soldiers, who have historically been recruited from a diverse pool.
But the intelligence services declined in power and influence as Bashir became more paranoid about internal challenges to his rule.

The long-time intelligence chief, Salah Gosh, was formerly regarded as one of the most powerful people in Sudan and as a rival to Bashir.
By 2011, it became clear to Bashir that Gosh and the service he commanded could threaten his rule.
As a result, he sidelined Gosh and curtailed the intelligence services’ operational capabilities.
In November 2012, Sudanese authorities detained Gosh, accusing him of plotting to sabotage the government.
Bashir rehabilitated him six years later and reappointed him intelligence chief in February 2018.

Although in the intervening period the RSF had emerged as Bashir’s favourite security force, when protests broke out in December 2018, Gosh’s apparatus spearheaded the crackdown.
Overwhelmed with detainees, Gosh scrambled to build new jail cells and repurpose ordinary prison quarters to hold the service’s detainees.
But, as noted above, Gosh soured on Bashir after the latter’s apparent about-face on initiating a transition in February 2019.
In April 2019, Gosh appeared to allow the protests to swell, and even to permit the 6 April sit-in to form in front of army headquarters in Khartoum.
For a few weeks, the intelligence services’ vehicles disappeared from the streets; intimidation and arrests stopped.

By this time, Gosh and Hemedti were conspiring to oust Bashir.
But the relationship between the two security chiefs soon began to deteriorate.
Gosh saw himself as a leader and resented Hemedti’s apparent ambitions.
For his part, Hemedti distrusted Gosh.

Many in the protest movement also distrusted Gosh, given his role suppressing protests and running a service many Sudanese blamed for gross human rights abuses (including administering a network of makeshift prisons where detainees were allegedly tortured).
After initially resisting calls from the movement to leave office when Bashir fell, he resigned on 13 April.
A few weeks after Gosh quit, police directed by the Transitional Military Council chiefs tried to arrest him on corruption charges, but intelligence services officers, who remained loyal to him, prevented his detention.
Soon afterward, Gosh left the country, reportedly to Egypt, where he appears to have remained active in trying to shape events in Sudan.

Gosh’s rivals have worked to dismantle his power base in the intelligence services.
After Gosh left office, Hemedti used his influence to sack dozens of officers from the intelligence services.
And in July, the Transitional Military Council announced that the NISS would become the General Intelligence Service, dedicated solely to intelligence gathering and losing its other internal security capabilities.
The RSF has reportedly folded many former NISS officers, particularly those from its operational arm, into its ranks – thereby further strengthening Hemedti.

On 15 August, the U.S. State Department announced that it would sanction Gosh, in what observers viewed as a warning to influential Sudanese attempting to sabotage the transition.

As Khartoum’s transitional government seeks to turn the corner on Bashir’s brutal legacy and create a foundation for stable future governance, security sector reform will be critically important.
Two near-term objectives for the transitional government should be 1) to make the security services more accountable for their abuses and 2) to start to bring the country’s primary military and paramilitary organisations under a single command.

Concerning the first objective, the civilian leadership of the transitional cabinet should work with the legislative council, when it is formed, to repeal laws that give the security forces immunity from prosecution for crimes committed in the course of duty.
A change to this legal regime, one of the world’s most permissive, would signal that the government no longer tolerates wanton abuses of power by the state’s agents and would be in keeping with the commitment all sides made in the constitutional agreement to implement "legal reform (and) rebuild and develop the human rights and justice system".

As for the second objective, the most significant challenge will almost certainly be how to deal with the RSF, which exists outside the formal military.
As a Western diplomat put it: "It is difficult to see how Sudan can be a democracy if individuals control quasi-private militias outside the command of the formal armed forces".

The RSF’s wealth and power mean that simply disbanding it – which many within the opposition coalition understandably call for – is not realistic.
Instead, Prime Minister Hamdok, the military leadership and the RSF should continue discussions broached by the opposition coalition and some within the armed forces during this summer’s negotiations about the power-sharing agreement on the possibility of merging the security forces.
In this scenario, RSF commanders and troops would retain their jobs but fall under the military command’s authority.
Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo, which all have stated their commitment to stability in Sudan, should emphasise to RSF leadership that placing the country’s security forces under unified command is essential for achieving this goal and encourage them in this direction.
Patience and persistence will be necessary, however, as the RSF benefits greatly from the status quo and is therefore likely to be very resistant to this sort of change.

If domestic consensus can be achieved, actors such as the EU, which have experience in backing reform of the security sector and reintegration efforts, could offer support for the reintegration into society of those RSF militiamen who do not want to join the army and would prefer to go back to civilian life.

The Forces for Freedom and Change is a fragile coalition of parties, political personalities, unions and civil activist groups often with competing interests, divergent constituencies and opposing ideologies.
Some veteran opposition party leaders within its ranks are part of the same old guard that many Sudanese view as sharing responsibility for the country’s woes.
Its younger leadership cohort, however, particularly the professionals and civil society figures who organised the protest movement, enjoy great credibility with the public, as demonstrated by their capacity repeatedly to summon tens of thousands of Sudanese into the streets.

Throughout, the opposition has shown not only determination but also a mastery of optics.
The sit-in outside the army’s Khartoum headquarters was redolent with symbolism – and made for great television.
In naming Ahmed al-Rabia, a schoolteacher who drives a taxi at night to supplement his income, as a chief spokesman in April, the opposition drew a sharp contrast between its support base – ordinary Sudanese seeking change – and the generals who got rich during Bashir’s long rule.

The Forces for Freedom and Change coalition is expected to form the bedrock of support for efforts to institute full civilian rule at the end of the pivotal 39-month transition, but it is a work in progress.
For all the FFC’s accomplishments, it is not yet clear whether its many component organisations will maintain the unity required to check the security sector.

The coalition represents a wide diversity of professional, civil society and political organisations, and its internal dynamics are correspondingly complex.
Upon its formation in January 2019, a few weeks after protests broke out, the coalition assembled its coordinating committee, which steered the movement until Bashir’s ouster, at which point the political parties became more dominant and led the negotiations.
Its most active members were the Sudanese Professionals Association, the civil society group Sudan Call (a collection of Sudan’s more established political parties, rebel representatives and civil society activists) and other lobbies, including the Families of Ramadan Martyrs and the No to Women’s Oppression Initiative.
As the protests took shape, established political parties also began to play a bigger role in the movement.

Of these groups, the Sudanese Professionals Association was and remains most prominent in the public eye.
The group formed in 2014, remained fairly inactive until 2018, and then assumed a leadership role in the uprising.
Civil society groups rallied around the SPA’s leadership and mainstream opposition parties lent it behind-the-scenes support, realising that they lacked the popular legitimacy to lead the movement.
This tactical decision accelerated the protests’ momentum and also boosted the SPA’s popularity.
By December 2018, the group consisted of seven underground professional syndicates and trade unions, led by a committee of the union heads.
The SPA remained at the vanguard of protests until 11 April, when the military moved against Bashir, at which point it assumed a lower profile.
Said one local political analyst: "For once, the opposition managed not to shoot itself in the foot".

Still, the coalition has had its challenges.
For one thing, some groups believe the coalition has been too accommodating.
A bloc known as the National Consensus Forces split with leading coalition member Sudan Call in March over the latter’s decision to participate in a proposed AU-led dialogue with Bashir’s government.
Two members of the bloc – the Sudanese Communist Party and the Popular Congress Party – subsequently announced that they would not join the yet-to-be-formed legislative council or nominate members to the cabinet because in their view the FFC had offered too many concessions to the generals.

Another grievance that some groups complain of is under-representation.
This is a particular concern for the Sudan Revolutionary Front, an umbrella for armed groups that have fought insurgent campaigns on Sudan’s periphery.
The Revolutionary Front and National Umma Party have together called for formation of a leadership council that would represent the coalition’s different strands and be its decision-making body.
Civil society groups, particularly the SPA, initially opposed this idea, contending that the existing flat structure, involving hundreds of neighbourhood committees and a faceless coordinating committee, was better positioned to avoid detection by Bashir’s repressive security apparatus.
Nevertheless, in the weeks leading up to the 3 June attack on protesters, civil society leaders began negotiations about forming the leadership council.
The 3 June massacre disrupted these plans, as many leading coalition figures (especially youth leaders) went into hiding, but once mediation began, the council was formed.

Beyond addressing grievances that could threaten internal cohesion, the opposition will need to communicate more effectively and promptly with the public as part of efforts to improve its capacity as a serious political player.
Over the course of the summer’s transition talks, it was a source of public frustration and apprehension that the opposition, understandably accustomed to operating secretly, closely guarded information on progress that was being made.
Outside civil society organisations and donors, including the EU, U.S. and others, should encourage opposition leadership to be more open and to welcome a flourishing public debate on Sudan’s future as part of their efforts to build support for the transition.

Another risk to the opposition is that the generals could seek to widen the opposition’s internal divisions by co-opting its constituents.
One potentially important fissure is along geographic lines.
As indicated above, the opposition is already exposed to the criticism that it is too dominated by metropolitan elites and draws a disproportionate number of its leaders from Khartoum.
Against this backdrop, Hemedti has cast himself as a champion of rural Sudan and cultivated alliances with the leaders of armed groups that opposed Bashir and should be the opposition coalition’s natural allies.
He could strengthen these ties and try to peel off other coalition partners using similar tactics, weakening the coalition at a time when unity will be critical to its efforts to loosen the generals’ hold on power.
For this reason, it will be important for the opposition to be attentive in their actions and policies to both the rebels’ desire for a serious voice in coalition decision-making and to their concerns about Sudan’s treatment of its citizens in its long-neglected peripheries, as discussed below.

Sudan’s centre-periphery tensions predate the Bashir era, but its internal wars intensified under the deposed president.
South Sudan eventually seceded, while wars expanded to more places in the north.
Mass atrocities perpetrated by Bashir’s security forces in Darfur led to his indictment by the International Criminal Court, the first of a sitting head of state.

The new transitional government must reckon with the legacy of decades of efforts by elites in the wealthier riverine centre to subdue rebellions across the country by force.
This legacy encompasses several regions devastated by conflict, huge displaced populations and an array of rebel movements, some scattered outside Sudan’s borders.
Bringing peace to warring areas should be a priority during the transitional period and will require careful consideration of the accommodations that the rebels are seeking.
These include steps to reverse the imposition of Islamic law on religious minorities, separate religion and state, and provide for a fairer distribution of power and resources to areas in the periphery, including by allowing them to elect governors rather than imposing these from distant Khartoum.

Abdelaziz al-Hilu, who, as noted below, leads the largest faction of the Sudanese People’s Liberation Army-North, characterised the rebels’ core grievances to Crisis Group as structural.
Al-Hilu said Arabic-speaking elites in Khartoum have long tried to impose a "false Arab identity" on a culturally diverse country.
This attitude, he said, impelled minorities to take up arms to protect their position in society.
He added that successive regimes have worsened centre-periphery relations with the logic of political Islam, which casts non-Muslims as second-class citizens.
Al-Hilu concluded by saying: "The other in Sudan is always oppressed, marginalised and excluded when it comes to access to power and wealth.
The other in Sudan is left with only two options, either to accept inferiority status or be exterminated".

The nature of Sudan’s internal conflicts changed after South Sudan’s 2011 independence.
Rebel remnants from Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile regrouped into the Sudanese Revolutionary Front.
At the time, the Darfur conflict had raged for years, but the conflict in the latter two areas was just restarting after a respite ushered in by the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
In its first two years, the Front, supported by Juba, made significant battlefield gains and threatened the central government’s hold on the provinces where the fighting was taking place.
The group also forged an alliance with the political opposition, joining Sudan Call.

The Front has since splintered, however, limiting its relevance as an armed force.
Among its constituent parts, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction under Malik Agar, of Blue Nile, and Yasir Arman, of northern Sudan, lost most of its fighters following a bitter split in 2017.
Darfuri rebel leader Minni Minnawi’s Sudan Liberation Army faction is now based in Libya as mercenaries fighting on behalf of General Haftar.
The fighting force of the Justice and Equality Movement under Jibril Ibrahim is thought to have dwindled below a few hundred operating in South Sudan and Libya.
These groups’ political strength among Sudanese is difficult to gauge but is likely eroding, even in war-affected regions.

Though vocal in its efforts to get a seat at the table during transitional agreement talks, the Front is in reality overshadowed by larger, more powerful armed groups that sit outside it.
One is the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction led by Hilu, who took most of the rebel fighters with him in the 2017 split.
Hilu has a secure stronghold in the Nuba Mountains of South Kordofan and commands the largest rebel faction in Blue Nile.
Another is the Sudan Liberation Movement faction of Abdul-Wahid al-Nur, which is the only remaining significant rebel force in Darfur.
Nur’s faction has declined in power in its Jebel Marra stronghold during his long self-imposed exile in France, as has the strength of his personal command.
Both leaders disengaged from peace talks in Bashir’s final years – especially Nur, who earned notoriety among diplomats for his consistent refusal to enter negotiations.

But even if the Front is no longer the most powerful of the armed groups, both the coalition and the generals have vied for influence over it, conscious of its symbolic significance and potential spoiler role.
Negotiations in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa in July 2019 made headway in aligning the Front’s demands with the coalition’s positions but in the end the rebel leaders walked out.
Tensions remain rife: as noted above, the Front has griped about the coalition’s decision-making process and having to play second fiddle to the civilian leaders, whom they see as another collection of aloof riverine elites.
Meanwhile, Hemedti, whom the military council charged with outreach to Sudan’s rebel movements, has been in touch through his own channels with the Front’s members.
His late June meeting with Minnawi, brokered by Chadian President Idriss Deby, fed speculation that the generals are working to pull the rebels away from the coalition and into their corner.

South Sudan and Egypt have also sought roles as mediators between Sudan’s generals and rebels.
South Sudan, which historically has been the main backer of several of the armed groups, has taken the lead in marshalling these parties to find a compromise.
In the first week of September, its president, Salva Kiir, hosted key armed group leaders for talks and subsequently met Prime Minister Hamdok.
On 11 September, the parties signed the Juba Declaration, indicating that Juba would remain the sole forum for peace talks.
South Sudan is likely to remain an important actor as it seeks to cultivate ties with the new administration in Khartoum on this role, having lost its prior channel, which relied on Bashir.
The benefits of a long-term sustainable peace would be considerable.
It would mean that humanitarian workers could gain easier access to regions long under siege from the security forces while a permanent ceasefire – potentially overseen by AU monitors – would allow local populations freedom of movement across lines previously controlled by the patchwork of belligerents active across rural Sudan.

The coup against Bashir and the generals’ consolidation of power with Gulf backing has put Sudan’s Islamist political machinery, embodied in recent years primarily by the ruling National Congress Party, out of order.
Its incapacity may be temporary, however, since it still controls layers of the state bureaucracy and military.
A failed counter-coup attempt on 24 July, reportedly involving Islamist-allied military personnel, suggests that at least some of Bashir’s old guard may see themselves as his legitimate heirs.

Sudan’s version of the so-called deep state has its roots in the country’s Islamist movement, which Bashir co-opted first to mount his own coup in 1989 and later to extend his rule.
This movement, the National Islamic Front, was led by the prominent preacher Hassan al-Turabi for almost ten years.
It was a major component of Sudan’s ruling party and controlled much of the government bureaucracy.

Though Bashir later fell out with Turabi and rebranded the Front as the National Congress Party, Bashir’s coalition continued to comprise Islamists acting in concert with security factions and opportunists.
Bashir gradually shunted the party aside in the final years of his rule in a desperate attempt to disassociate himself from a political entity that many Sudanese blamed for the collapsing economy.
Despite the NCP’s troubles, however, its members remain part of a relatively well-resourced and entrenched political network on the outside of the power-sharing arrangements.
Two Islamist political organisations that are also on the sidelines are the Popular Congress, which Turabi founded after his split with Bashir, and Reform Now.
Both were once allied with Bashir but decided to back the protests that toppled him.

Given their nationwide political machinery and extensive financial resources after decades of access to government resources and contracts, the NCP and allied parties could yet emerge as powerful post-Bashir actors.
In the spring of 2019, after the state of emergency declaration and weeks before Bashir’s ouster, party leaders reportedly began scheming about where and how to hide their wealth.
The NCP could be positioning itself to return to the political scene, and it may have some inside support.
To their Egyptian and Gulf backers, the generals claim to be purging Islamist forces from the military and senior ranks of the civil service but some observers believe that the former junta and the NCP have a quiet truce.

By standing apart from the transition, and in fact defining themselves in opposition to both the civilian coalition and the generals, parties associated with Islamism could well profit from the inevitable challenges that the transitional government will face.
Because they are outside of it, they stand to gain public support should the transitional government be unable to deliver on key promises, especially with respect to reviving the economy.
Further, they may be able to call upon eager patrons in Qatar and Turkey, which are both looking for opportunities to regain their foothold in Khartoum.

That said, both Abu Dhabi and Riyadh are keen to keep parties with strong links to Islamists in political exile.
These two monarchies calculate that Sudan’s security forces are their most dependable ally in that regard.
The civil society component of the opposition coalition has also consistently rejected any accommodation with Muslim Brotherhood-style political Islam, identifying it as a legacy of Bashir that must be swept away.

Sudan has gripped the attention of Western, Gulf and African observers who are concerned, among other things, by the prospect of the Sudanese state’s implosion.
External actors have had to grapple with a complex crisis, notable for deep schisms between the key actors who will determine the country’s future as well as divisions within the negotiating blocs themselves.
Consistent, unified support for Sudan’s political negotiations is necessary to avoid a breakdown of the civilian-military transitional administration on whose shoulders Sudan’s near-term fate now rests.
Indeed, without substantial external pressure, it is unlikely that the junta would have acceded to the concessions necessary to arrive at the deal adopted 17 August.

The AU and Ethiopia have been critical to bridging the divide between the opposition coalition and security establishment.

Until the 3 June massacre, the two sides refused offers of international and regional mediation, but the killings in Khartoum created new pressure to talk.
International revulsion over the massacre found expression in the AU’s 6 June decision to suspend Sudan’s membership.
The action by the Peace and Security Council, reportedly taken in spite of lobbying on Sudan’s behalf by Egypt, illustrated the generals’ growing isolation after the killings.
Still, even as pressure for mediation grew, it was not immediately clear which regional and international actors would get traction.
The AU Commission renewed its offer to step in, but the Sudanese parties initially rebuffed its efforts.

In the end, it was Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, who reset the talks.
Four days after the massacre, Abiy arrived in Khartoum, wearing the hat of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, a regional body that Ethiopia now chairs.
He quickly met with both sides, leaving senior diplomat Mahmoud Dirir behind as his envoy.
Critically, Abiy’s effort received the public and private backing of the UAE, which had previously played a key role in brokering Ethiopia’s rapprochement with Eritrea.

After talks got under way, apparent disunity between the AU and Ethiopian envoys stymied early efforts at achieving a breakthrough.
The envoys offered contrasting proposals to the opposition and military council, each containing different numbers for the composition of the planned legislative and sovereign councils.
But after discussions in Addis, the AU and Ethiopian envoys closed ranks on 26 June, and presented both sides with a joint proposal, which became the basis for the 17 July political accord and the constitutional declaration eventually adopted on 17 August.
The formula for the sovereign council that finally proved acceptable – with five members each appointed by the civilian coalition and the generals and an eleventh jointly chosen civilian – echoed the initial Ethiopian proposals.

Coordinating Western and Gulf pressure on the parties to reach a negotiated deal took some time.
In the weeks and months leading up to Bashir’s ouster, many Sudanese protesters were frustrated at the relative silence of key Western countries.
Even after Bashir fell, pivotal players, notably Washington, which had de facto led the Troika partnership effort to stabilise Sudan and South Sudan dating back to the early 2000s, stayed largely out of the fray.
The opposition, Addis Ababa, Washington and European governments were together frustrated with Riyadh and Abu Dhabi for supporting Sudan’s military council notwithstanding signals that it did not intend to share power with civilians.

Two international initiatives helped bring Western and Gulf governments together with regional actors behind a common position.

The first to form was the Friends of Sudan contact group, an initiative primarily driven by Western diplomats, which met first in May in Washington and included representatives from the UN, AU, EU and Ethiopia, and which expanded to include Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Qatar at its second meeting in Berlin in June.
A statement after the June meeting, issued by the German foreign ministry, said all agreed on the need for a transition to civilian rule.
One Western official, however, described this forum as "cosmetic" – useful primarily for coordinating financial aid packages – mainly because neither Saudi Arabia nor the UAE, the junta’s critical backers, sent high-level delegations.

Indeed, it was a second – smaller, quieter and more informal – group that proved more effective.
On the sidelines of a Quad (the U.S., the UK, Saudi Arabia and the UAE) ministerial meeting in London regarding Yemen in late April the group discussed Sudan.
Those discussions ultimately led to a secret, Quad-brokered meeting in Khartoum on 29 June between the military council, including Hemedti, and opposition coalition leaders, to cool temperatures in advance of the next day’s "million-man" march.

Beyond these group efforts, Washington also pressured Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo through bilateral channels.
In public, the U.S. pointedly condemned the 3 June killings and pressed the Saudis to do more so that the junta would change course.
In visits to Cairo and Riyadh in July, U.S. Special Envoy Donald Booth, appointed just nine days after the Khartoum massacre, made it clear that Washington supported a negotiated compromise and backed calls for a civilian-led administration.

U.S. pressure on Saudi Arabia and the UAE, the junta’s principal external backers, paved the way for such compromise.
Diplomats who follow the region differ as to whether the two Gulf countries decided after 3 June that the military could not govern effectively using purely strong-arm tactics, or whether they were more focused on the need to defuse the immediate situation given the global backlash the June violence engendered.
Either way, Washington’s diplomacy helped focus both Riyadh and Abu Dhabi on the importance of shifting their posture, which they did.

Although Egypt, another critical player, also altered its position and began pressing the junta to compromise, Cairo looks at Sudan through a somewhat different lens than the Gulf states.
Its involvement in Sudan is rooted in its historical desire to maintain political stability in an important neighbour, as well as to thwart Islamist movements it views as extensions of the Muslim Brotherhood.
But it is also invested in preventing its regional rival Ethiopia from outflanking it in shaping Sudan’s post-Bashir order, and maintaining sufficient influence to defend its interests in a country through which the Nile river, critical to Egypt’s survival, charts its course from the Ethiopian highlands.
Against this backdrop, Egypt’s persistent closeness to the generals – with whom it has met numerous times since Bashir’s ouster – will likely continue to be a channel for Cairo to assert itself in a political environment where it is competing with Addis, and where Ethiopia’s Abiy remains popular with the opposition following his mediation efforts this summer.

The deal reached this summer was hard-won and remains Sudan’s best hope.
If implemented, it can prevent – for now – a worst-case scenario of spiralling violence and state collapse.
Yet the path ahead remains daunting.
A central challenge moving forward will be maintaining coordinated pressure from across several continents to make sure that the deal sticks and Sudan’s transition remains on a firm footing.

A key driver of the protests that forced Bashir out of power was the parlous state of Sudan’s economy.
The new administration inherits the challenge of improving the lives of millions of Sudanese immiserated by decades of ruinous policies.
Widespread corruption, massive transfers of capital abroad by the top brass and NCP insiders and extravagant expenditure on the defence sector contributed to an economic crisis exacerbated by high inflation, enormous foreign debt and widespread shortages of essential goods, including fuel, bread and medicine.

In recent months, technocrats from the opposition have devised what they describe as an "emergency plan" to revive the economy.
Among its worthy components are reforming key institutions, including the central bank, to ensure that all government revenue is channelled through formal institutions and not into the generals’ coffers; tackling the parallel currency market as part of an effort to stabilise the overvalued official currency; setting up a system to encourage and facilitate remittances from Sudan’s vast diaspora; and trebling the budgetary allocation to the health and education sectors from 5 to at least 15 per cent.

Prime Minister Hamdok, whose most recent posting was as deputy executive secretary and chief economist at the UN Economic Commission for Africa, has the right training and expertise to take on this task.
But he faces an enormous obstacle in the form of Sudan’s debt stock, which stands at close to $60 billion.
Securing debt relief from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Sudan’s Paris Club creditors, however, is bound up with the question of whether the U.S. government will rescind its 1993 designation of Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism (SST), which was imposed at a time when Khartoum hosted al-Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden.

Given the politics surrounding the SST issue in the U.S. and in light of historically fraught relations between Washington and Khartoum, lifting the designation will not be straightforward.
Moreover, even if it is lifted, Sudan’s arrears of $2.6 billion will nevertheless preclude debt relief until they can be cleared.

Still, Khartoum – along with its European and Gulf partners – should press for lifting the SST designation, and Washington should acquiesce.
There are more than enough economic, symbolic and political reasons to move forward with the SST lifting as soon as possible.
In addition to being a necessary though insufficient step toward debt relief (which will also require meeting benchmarks for fiscal transparency in addition to clearing arrears), lifting the SST designation will open the way for international banks to re-engage with Sudan, reconnect the country to the international financial system, signal to foreign investors that the country is open for business and make clear to the world that Washington no longer considers Khartoum a pariah.
Rescission will also pave the way for the loosening of other U.S. legislation and executive orders that restrict aid and U.S. economic ties to Sudan.

Perhaps most critically, on the political level rescission will be an important win for Hamdok, who can use it to consolidate public support at a moment when he will need all the strength he can muster.
Just weeks ago, Hamdok made an impassioned appeal to the UN General Assembly to help him rehabilitate Sudan’s international image and lobbied for the U.S. to lift the SST designation.
Lifting it will show that he can deliver.
Although U.S. government officials have indicated to external interlocutors that lifting could take up to a year once there is a decision to do it, there is nothing in the laws governing rescission to indicate that it needs to take so long, and former executive branch officials suggest that there is precedent for moving much more quickly.
Moreover, even if there are hidden impediments in the case of Sudan, the U.S. government can signal its intention now, pledging to move as quickly as possible toward rescission – a signal of support that would serve Hamdok well.

Some knowledgeable observers have argued against taking this step before the RSF has demonstrated that it will allow the transitional authorities to make needed reforms and negotiate peace.
They are understandably concerned that rescission will eliminate Washington’s key tool for pressing Sudanese hardliners not to spoil the transition.

Kicking the can down the road has considerable downsides, however.
Indeed, there are strong arguments militating for lifting the SST designation even if Sudan were not negotiating a delicate political transition.
For one thing, some commentators (including Crisis Group) have long expressed concern that the sanctions flowing from the designation disproportionately hurt the Sudanese people, create a shadow economy that empowers senior security officials and their cronies, and give the country’s leadership an excuse for its poor economic performance.
For another thing, it is hardly clear that Sudan – which obviously no longer hosts Osama bin Laden and has for years been a U.S. counter-terrorism partner – satisfies the criteria for being an SST any longer.

But the central consideration should be that Sudan is in the midst of a delicate political transition, where lifting the designation has the potential to create positive momentum and maintaining it could have perilous consequences.
Securing a rescission of Khartoum’s SST status would give Hamdok the political win alluded to above and boost prospects for a successful transition.
It would demonstrate to the Sudanese people that moving toward civilian government – as they have been doing over the course of the past year – can open doors that were long closed to the country and give it a chance at a more prosperous future.
By contrast, the longer Washington delays in lifting the designation, the more the generals will be able to sow doubt that the civilians entrusted with Sudan’s transition are capable of bringing about the economic turnaround the country needs.

To be sure, if the U.S. moves forward with SST lifting, there is a risk that the generals will subsequently seek to derail the transition, and Washington will have lost one tool for influencing them.
But there are other pressures that may help to keep the generals in line.
For a start, even if the SST designation is lifted, Sudan will still need to meet certain reform benchmarks (especially with respect to fiscal transparency) in order to qualify for debt relief.
Whether the generals might be willing to risk public outrage and Sudan’s economic future in order to spoil the reforms and deny Hamdok a win is simply not clear; some analysts doubt it.
To help manage this risk, Washington and Brussels should also signal loud and clear that spoilers who impede Sudan’s economic or political transition will be targeted for financial sanctions – as will their networks, companies and commercial facilitators.
The AU Peace and Security Council, which already warned on 7 June that it would "impose punitive measures on individuals and entities obstructing [the transition]", should reinforce this threat to deter spoilers.

Beyond SST rescission, the U.S. and other partners should be considering other ways to strengthen Hamdok’s hand at this pivotal moment.
One important step would be for them to create a broad economic relief package for the country that can help support the prime minister’s government while he embarks on necessary reforms.
This donor effort should involve the World Bank, the U.S., the EU and its member states, the Islamic Development Bank, the Saudi Fund for Development, the Abu Dhabi Fund for Development and other members of the Friends of Sudan international forum, such as Qatar.
All participating entities should pool funds for budget support and coordinated development projects and channel them to the government through a lead agency such as the World Bank or the African Development Bank.

Additionally, to help Khartoum put its financial house in order, Hamdok should request, and foreign donors should provide, technical assistance to help Sudan’s ministries track state revenues and illicit rent-seeking behaviour within Sudan’s complex state and parastatal machineries, including in the profitable and corruption-prone oil sector.
With this assistance, Hamdok will be better able to navigate Sudan’s opaque financial systems and assess how he might take control of revenue streams that, legally, should be under the state’s purview and not under that of politically connected individuals with ties to the security services.
Hamdok initially may decide to move cautiously even with these tools at his disposal, however, lest he provoke a sharp reaction from actors within the security services who could see their interests threatened.

External actors should also consider how they can best use their diplomatic muscle in support of a successful transition to long-term civilian rule.
Experience with transitions elsewhere suggests that power sharing often founders when there is no party capable of offering an avenue for mediation if protagonists become deadlocked.

The AU might be able to help on this front.
It could appoint a special envoy to Sudan and expand its liaison office in Khartoum with the objective of providing mediation and other support to the transition; the UN could channel technical assistance through this office.
The proposed envoy could report to the AU chair and provide regular briefings to the Peace and Security Council, so that the Council can monitor the agreement’s implementation.
Having an AU representative in this role might bolster the opposition coalition’s confidence that they are not politically alone when they need to square off against the generals, who enjoy an asymmetric edge in military and economic power.
Finally, Sudan’s Western allies – especially the U.S. – should continue to give the transition a diplomatic boost by leaning on the generals’ most important external backers in Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo, so that the latter governments encourage the security forces’ leadership not to obstruct necessary economic and political reforms.
The core message addressed to them should reprise the considerations that finally drove them to push for a power-sharing agreement this summer: without these changes, the political stability that all three seek for Khartoum will likely remain elusive.

The fall of Bashir presents a rare opportunity to end Sudan’s long-running internal wars.
The new constitutional charter requires that transitional authorities prioritise the pursuit of a "just and comprehensive peace" within the first six months of the transition.
Sudanese authorities should use this period to urgently address this challenge.
Western, African and Gulf powers should throw their weight behind this effort.

First, the transitional government and rebel groups should swiftly proclaim a mutual ceasefire during the six-month timeframe allocated for striking peace deals.
If the parties can reach a permanent ceasefire agreement, a formal African-led ceasefire monitoring mission, under the office of the proposed AU envoy, should then be deployed to bolster security on the ground.
The government and rebel groups should also agree to open areas they control to humanitarian agencies and negotiate a mutual release of prisoners as they enter political talks.

Secondly, leaders from the regions that have suffered from wars with Bashir’s regime or their nominees should be offered positions in transitional institutions, lest they conclude that yet another betrayal is in the offing.
The two most powerful rebel leaders – Abdelaziz al-Hilu and Abdul-Wahid al-Nur of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North and the Sudan Liberation Movement, respectively – are unlikely to quickly join the government.
Nur, in particular, has already denounced the new government in Khartoum.
Sudan’s new civilian administration should nonetheless take care to avoid the perception of exclusion.
In making key appointments, it is essential for the prime minister, who himself hails from Kordofan, to include qualified candidates from rebel strongholds.

Thirdly, the transitional government will need to negotiate inclusive peace accords without succumbing to the temptation of further splintering the rebels, which would increase the likelihood of continued war by making peace negotiations even more complex.
These groups will present demands for greater regional autonomy and a more formal redistribution of power; both the security establishment and the opposition coalition should take these seriously, as those demands have strong grassroots support in peripheral areas.
These are concessions that the new authorities will probably need to make in order to start Sudan on its steep path to recovery.
Down the road, it will be necessary to consider how political commitments to greater autonomy translate into the country’s formal federal structure, and how to screen the rebels and integrate their forces into the nation’s security architecture.

Dealing with the splintered Darfuri factions may require a special effort, not least because of the rise of Hemedti, whose RSF now controls most of the region and is loathed by many Darfuris.
Most of the active Darfuri rebel groups are now outside the country, primarily in Libya, where they fight on multiple sides of that nation’s conflict.
Sudanese authorities should urge these groups to engage seriously in the talks.
The AU and EU should offer technical support for the initiative to help parties formulate a roadmap for sustainable peace.

Bashir’s fall is a victory for Sudan’s people and a chance to end Sudan’s legacy of state failure and civil strife.
Yet the path ahead is strewn with challenges and there is hard work ahead to make the transitional power-sharing agreement hold.
The Sudanese people, whose bravery brought down the strongman, will necessarily be at the vanguard of efforts to ensure that all parties abide by their commitments.
External support – particularly to pull Sudan’s economy out of its doldrums and to strengthen the hand of civilians in an uneasy power-sharing arrangement with generals who have an interest in sabotaging reform – is sorely needed.
Sudan’s elites will also need to seize the opportunity to stop the country’s numerous wars and redress the structural inequalities that undergird them.
Bashir’s rule broke Sudan; there will be no shortcuts to repairing the decades of damage wrought.
At least, albeit at great cost, the Sudanese have given themselves a fighting chance.

Khartoum/Addis Ababa/Nairobi/Abu Dhabi/Brussels, 21 October 2019






FFC Forces for Freedom and Change

NCP National Congress Party

NISS National Intelligence and Security Service

RSF Rapid Support Forces

SPA Sudanese Professionals Association

SST State Sponsor of Terrorism designation



####
document number 13: 
US targets, kills Iranian military leaders in rocket strike at Baghdad airport






####
document number 14: 
A 1919 Colonial House Finds Renewal in Soft Tones


Clever ideas for a Colonial home kitchen remodel and a newly-created bathroom

When Amanda, a former pastry chef, and Cory, a tech executive, saw their 1919 Yonkers Colonial house for the first time, they were charmed.
They loved everything, down to the kitchen’s dated salmon formica.
But they also knew that after they lived there for a bit, they would be renovating it to suit their family’s needs.
With their son, Herschel, and their cat, Horse P.
Cat, they moved into the 2,600-square-foot home and brainstormed about how to best remodel the kitchen and add a new downstairs bathroom.

To bring their Colonial home remodel to life, they posted their project on Sweeten and hired this Westchester-based contractor.
Sweeten matches home renovation projects with vetted general contractors, offering advice, support, and financial protection—at no cost to the homeowner.


"After" photos by Miao Jiaxin for Sweeten

Guest blog post by Sweeten homeowner Amanda


A charming (but not functional) Colonial home


We had been dividing our time between a farmhouse in Dutchess County and a walk-up apartment in Brooklyn.
When our son was born, neither of these homes was quite suited to us.
We decided to find a place in between with a shorter commute for my husband, more social opportunities for me, and easy access to the home.

When we first saw the house, we were charmed by the time-capsule of a kitchen—salmon formica, dark-wood cabinets, and a dishwasher that predated the other elements.
That said, we knew we would eventually update the kitchen.
Having a lavatory on the ground floor and not having to run upstairs was also on the wishlist.


The existing kitchen had one radiator, which was buried in the back of a custom cabinet.
It was a clever solution at the time, but ate up a lot of cabinet space and wasn’t heat-efficient.
We decided to install a radiant floor heating system that we could run off of our existing hot-water heating system.
A more formal, fully-functional island would offer storage, outlets, and a bigger counter area.


Save



####
document number 15: 
NoFundMe: NRA Protest March Nets $70 in National Fundraising Effort


Crowd funding is a relatively recent innovation that allows a person or cause to leverage the vast reach of the Internet to raise money for virtually every imaginable purpose.
Even small donations of a few dollars can aggregate into impressive sums with sufficient participation.
It also provides an interesting window into the sorts of appeals that move people into parting with their own hard-won cash, as participants vote with their wallets, rather than just their online clicks or survey answers.
To that extent, it can provide some insight into what issues really attract substantial grassroots support.

It does, however, require a "crowd."
This recently proved to be a problem for a national appeal aimed at raising funds for the so-called "National March on the NRA" (NMNRA).
Despite the effort’s prominent exposure on the organizing entity’s website and social media platforms, and the hype the event itself received from a "news" apparatus eager to portray gun control as enjoying resurgent popular support, NMNRA’s online fundraising effort was an unmitigated bust.
Before the campaign finally closed, it had attracted only 3 contributors who ponied up a grand total of $70.

Here in Northern Virginia, that might just about get you a tank of gas for an 8-passenger van.


As astute observers of gun control advocacy already know, there is very little that is "grassroots" about it.
Its funders are principally billionaires who believe their vast wealth entitles them to remake American culture in their own image, guys like Michael Bloomberg, George Soros, and Paul Allen.
They are fortunately few in number but undeniably mighty in resources.

What they haven’t yet managed to do, however, is create a culture in which the idea of taking away peoples’ rights moves ordinary individuals to sustained action.
Causes that have attracted more support on the same crowd funding website NMNRA used have included a young man seeking money for "booze and cigarettes" (224% more support), an aspiring Yoga instructor (757%), and a parade float for a mother who wears heavy metal t-shirts (6,084%).

More to the point, there has also been greater support for a competitive shooter hoping to participate in an international match (1,357%) and a young cancer patient’s hunting fund (2,357%).

For months, the mass media has been insisting that America has turned a corner in its popular support for gun control and in its opposition to the NRA.

But talk, as they say, is cheap.

When you get past the media filter and see the sorts of choices Americans are making on their own, it becomes pretty clear they’re just not buying what the gun control advocates are pushing.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = fume event
document number 1: 
Throwing an Open Mic 101


Although it’s taken a little while, here is the promised post on how to throw your very own Open Mic Night!
No matter where you find yourself, open mics are a great way to bring communities together and generate creativity.
College campuses are especially good places since there are often lots of places to hold open mics and/or venues with sound equipment already there.

But before I get ahead of myself….

The workshop, part of Split This Rock and led by poets Dan Wilcox, Toni Asante Lightfoot, and Reuben Jackson, included a suggested timeline for throwing the event, an equipment list, and a Q with the poets.
Hopefully the advice they gave will help you better bring together art and activism on or off campus.

Very quickly, what is exactly

is

an Open Mic, just in case some are unfamiliar?
Open Mic (short for "microphone") refers to an event, a gathering really, where people can share their art; most often it’s poetry, spoken word or readings, but open mics can include anything from songs to performance art as long as it’s cool with the organizers.
It’s referred to as "open" because anyone and everyone can sign up so long as there’s time.
People sign up on a sheet before the event starts (or email the organizers depending on the event) and then are called up to perform.

Now, on to throwing one!

Here is the suggested timeline for an open mic event (keeping mind that a "feature poet" is someone more well-known who can attract folks to your event, and that this timeline is meant to be helpful for those on and off college campuses):

2 Months Before: Set date with Feature Poet Arrange for site to hold event

4-6 Weeks Before Event: Submit grant application to appropriate college sources or Poets Make fliers (full page and 1/4 page size)

One Month Before Event: Get bio information from Feature Poet Draft press release (see below for vitals of a press release) Assemble other press materials, such as photos Assemble/verify availability of equipment (see below for equipment list) Prepare labels for mailing (although so much is digital these days…) Attend other events and distribute your 1/4 page fliers

3 Weeks Before Event: Send out press release (may have to be sooner for monthly/less frequent publications)

1-2 Weeks Before Event: Send out first email notice

1 Week Before: Put up fliers on kiosks Send out second email

Day of the Event: Call media (see below for suggested media outlets) Send out final email blast Check equipment list and equipment Prepare sign up sheet Set up space Wait for the crowd to descend!

Given the awesomeness of the event, open mics are relatively easy to throw.
However, they do require supplies, so here’s an…

Equipment List!
Clipboard (for the host to hold the list) Sign up sheet Pen Feature Poet bio introduction Marker pen Sound equipment -Amplifier -Mic and mic cable -Mic stand -Power cord -Extension cord Music stand Fliers/announcements Tape (duct, masking, etc.)
Books, tapes, etc.
for sale Tape recorder, tape (or digital recorder) Camera (film, flash, and/or digital)

Hooray!
Although you can now throw a great event, just in case, here are the Q’s and A’s from the workshop.
They make some finer points and can hopefully assuage some concerns.

Where do I hold my Open Mic?

Location location location!
Since the goal is to gather people together, it’s important to invite people to a space that will be conducive to sharing and generating community.
A place that already has equipment is great, as is (if you’re hard up for amplification or a mic) a place that might not need to be amplified.
Small is usually better than large, since you want the event to be cozy.
Good places include coffee shops, cafes, common rooms, jazz centers, museums, art galleries, and libraries.
A shout-out to students, make sure you apply for those grants and use equipment you can borrow from your university or AV group!
Get creative – if there’s a place that speaks to you, give it a shot.
When describing an outlandish idea of his own, Jackson chuckled, "why not?
The worst they can say is no."

How do I advertise my Open Mic?

The bigger you want your event to be, the more advertising you’ll be doing.
Here are all the ideas for publicity, but pick and choose for what will be most effective for your community.
As suggested in the timeline, a great way to advertise for your own event is to bring those 1/4 fliers and attend other poetry events in the area.
You have your audience right there!
Make sure to write to your local papers, often especially by email.
A press release only needs to include the following information: who, what, where, and how much your requested donation is.
Make sure to follow up your press release with a phone call to the newspapers.
Call your community cable station, get folks on the radio, and tack up fliers on local bulletin boards.
Drop choice phrases into your advertising literature like "nonviolent," "community-centered," "youth empowerment," and "creative."
Make sure you have someone write up an article also after the event happens.

How long should each poet read?

For an event with about 20ish performers at approximately 2 hours, people should read for 3-4 minutes.
But, given that virtually no one is going to time his/her poetry, saying "one poem" with a 2-page max is usually a good bet.
Remember to write, "Please print" on the sign-up sheet so that the moderator will be able to read it.
Also good to have written at the top of the sheet is "might not read in sign-up order" to shake up the lineup so that people who want to read will stay and those who perform at the end still have an audience.
The order ‘open mic,’ then ‘feature poet,’ then ‘open mic’ is generally a good set up.
Last piece of advice here is that it can be helpful to have some folks with ‘poetry cred’ around to tell performers to wrap up if they’re running over-time.

How do I get a mic or a music stand?

Mics are good to have because they focus people’s attention on the performer and mics and amplifiers often come together for not too much (poets noted some good ones for ~$200).
Music stands can be found second hand (ask school band programs, or borrow them) and often times you can use a performer’s equipment if you clear it ahead of time (young musicians are especially good for this).

How much do I pay my feature poet?

This depends, check out their website or ask around if you’re curious.
Wilcox said that he pays ~$25 (and collects donations ahead of time and also passes around a hat during a break in the middle).
He suggests first paying the poet and then splitting the remaining donations with the house if you have a paying arrangement with the venue.

So our first event was great, but how do I get people to come back?

Hopefully your event lit sparks in your audience and they’ll keep coming back for more.
But in trying to hold on to your audience and get more readers, here are some suggestions: "gimmick nights" (e.g. writing on a theme, timed writing, object writing, banned poetry, poetry of a specific country, political poetry, etc.
), collaborations between different artists (e.g. poets teaching visual artists and vice versa, freestylers teaching poets, etc.
), bring a friend nights, and nights devoted to famous poets or poems.

Phew.
Hopefully this is more empowering than intimidating, although I recognize that it’s a lot of information to take in.
Use these lists, suggestions, and pieces of advice as you need them.
I’ve hosted and performed in many open mics and they are incredibly rewarding experiences.

Let the prospect of throwing your own Open Mic inspire you.
Best of luck and comment with any questions.



####
document number 2: 
How to Host a Successful Virtual Event: Tips and Best Practices



Virtual events still sound a little futuristic, but they’ve been happening since 1993 when the world’s first livestream brought us nail-biting webcam footage of a coffee maker in mid drip.
The streaming pot brewed up millions of views.

In some ways little has changed in 2020.
On TikTok, teenagers have gone viral with sleep feeds, raking in crypto coin as they catch some zzz’s.
But tech and social media upgrades have opened the door to new ways to connect online, from virtual museum tours to live Q with astronauts in space.

Even some of the largest conferences have gone partially or completely digital.
Moving events like this online can reduce costs and carbon footprints, and make attendance accessible to a wider audience.
In 2018, Coachella’s YouTube livestream brought Beyoncé’s

Homecoming

to more than 41 million people in more than 232 countries, rather than just the hundreds of thousands in attendance in person.

From live-tweeting to livestreaming, businesses and organizations are staging virtual events across the web.
So, is your company ready to get digital?

Whether you have an event already in mind or you’re looking for ideas, this article is your all-access pass.

What is a virtual event?


A virtual event is any organized meet-up that takes place online rather than in a physical location.
These events can range from small question-and-answer sessions to large-scale conferences with thousands of attendees.
Even a livestreamed feed of a solo cup pyramid can be a virtual event, apparently.

Here’s a rundown of the different kinds of online business events your company can host.

How-to’s, tutorials, and classes


Have a product or service that needs some explaining?
A how-to or tutorial is a good way to provide tips, tricks, and instructions.

This type of event can be used to launch a new product, answer frequently-asked questions, or reveal different use cases.
Kick things up a notch with a full-on class.
For instance, yoga instructors or chefs can share exercise and cooking classes online.

Training and courses


For more complex topics, webinars, workshops, and courses might be a better fit.
This format can offer deep dives around specific themes, skill sets, tools, and more.
For example, some of Hootsuite’s webinars include Best Practices for Using Search and Social Advertising Together and How to Build an Audience Driven Social Marketing Plan.

Behind-the-scenes tours


Give your followers a peek behind-the-scenes.
Places like museums, galleries, theatres, airports, and even national parks, can offer viewers glimpses at what it’s like to visit.
Or what it’s like to work somewhere.

Your business doesn’t have to be an attraction to make it happen.
Tour your lab, factory, office, workshop, tradeshow or test kitchen.
Show your customers how the "sausage" gets made.

Interviews and performances


Tap your in-house experts to share their knowledge in a live question-and-answer session.
Host a laidback Ask Me Anything (AMA) on social media.
Or invite speakers or artists to give a talk or performance.

Everything from TED-style talks to stand-up comedy shows or intimate interviews is fair game.
Interactive trivia games and contests can also keep things engaging.

Conferences and shows


Even large-scale events can have a virtual component.
From Coachella to SXSW, live concerts and summits have been streamed online so that people who can’t attend in person can still get in on the action.
But there are also many conferences that take place entirely online, with networking and meetings integrated, too.

How to host a virtual event (and tools that can help)


There are a variety of ways to host a virtual event.
Here’s a round-up of the different formats along with some of the best virtual events platforms you can use.

Live tweeting


Start an online discussion by live tweeting an event, asking a question, or hosting an Ask Me Anything.
Use a hashtag to help people find and follow the conversation.

Other online discussion tools include:

Social Stories


Stories are a great platform to share videos and visuals of tutorials, interviews, and more.
Add filters, special effects, and stickers to take questions, conduct polls, host an influencer takeover, and more.
On Instagram, you can add them to a highlight for future viewers.

The ephemeral approach to live events works with:

Webinars


A typical webinar is an online presentation held in real-time.
But they can be shared and viewed afterwards as well.
Most of the time, a presenter will share their screen to go through slides or demos, while narrating.
Participants can ask questions by voice or through a chat feed if the platform and presenter allows.

It’s like a one-off workshop or class that happens in real-time.

Webinar platform options include:


6connex: Available on any browser or device, with no download required.
Features include flexible registration, social media integration, and real-time analytics.


Crowdcast: Can be joined through a single URL.
Tools include built-in registration forms, analytics, replays, and more.


Demio: Allows for pre-recorded or live webinars—or a mix of both.
Includes private chat, interactive polls, call-to-action buttons, and other features.


Livestorm: On-demand webinars from Livestorm include integrations with Google Analytics, Slack, and various engagement tools.


WebinarNinja: No need to download software for this platform, which offers paid and free events, 1,000+ app integrations, and even Facebook Pixel ad tracking.


Zoom: Can have one host, group chat—and even offers breakout rooms.
Plans cover from 100 to 10,000 view-only attendees.



Social livestreams


Just about every social media platform has a live video feature.
Livestreams are known for driving engagement.
According to Facebook, live video averages six times more engagement than regular video.

Social livestream platforms include:

Most livestreams show comments and attendees in real time.
And some, like Instagram, make it possible for you to go live with a friend—a good option for a Q or co-presentation.

Facebook also rolled out a live shopping feature in May 2020.

Conferences and networking


For more formal virtual events, there are platforms that offer suites of tools that include livestreaming, chatrooms, and more.


6connex: Exhibitors can create virtual booths, compete for leaderboard positions, livestream, and chat with this virtual trade show platform.


AirMeet


Brella: Speakers, multitrack agendas, sponsors, individual streams, and more are taken care of with this hub for virtual conferences.


HeySummit: Build a landing page, onboard speakers, register attendees, and more.
Note that this solution helps package virtual events, but you’ll need to integrate with tools for livestreaming.


Hop In: This all-in-one live events platform covers everything from networking events, meetings, trade shows, webinars, live broadcasts, and more.


Run the World: Everything from cocktail parties to fireside chats are an option with this remote conference platform.
Built-in templates are available for different use-cases to minimize event-planning hassles.


Vfairs: A virtual expo platform with everything from booths to webinar and conversations starter tools.



Tips for hosting virtual events


All events come with logistical challenges.
Here’s how to avoid hiccups during your virtual event.

1.
Create a game plan


Whether big or small, offline or online, every event should have a strategy.
Start with a key goal and concept, then take it from there.
The earlier you can get planning, the better.

Before hosting a virtual event, answer the following questions:


What kind of experience do you hope to deliver?


Will the event be live, on-demand, or both?


Where do I want the content to be seen?


Will access be gated or free?


When is the best time for the event?


Will you require event registration?


How will you promote the event?


Do you plan to work with an advertiser or other partner?


Will people still have access to the event once it’s over?


What KPIs and data do you plan to track?



2.
Choose the right time


Picking the right date and time for your event is important, regardless of size or platform.
Before sending out "save the dates" to your network, do a little research.
Make sure there are no competing events or holidays that would interfere with attendance.

Take time zones into consideration, too.
If you plan to go global, try your best to pick a time that works for as many of your customers and followers as possible.
If that doesn’t seem possible, make sure content is accessible after live presentations for those who couldn’t make it.
It may also be worthwhile to plan multiple networking sessions and different virtual events for different time zones.

Check analytics to see when your community is typically online.
And for a firmer consensus, consider sending out or posting a poll for preferred dates.
Emily Schuman, founder of Cupcakes and Cashmere, used an Instagram Story sticker to set the time for an Instagram live session.


By the way, these are the best times to post on social media.

3.
Promote the event


"Build it and they will come" may be a fallacy, but "promote it and they will come," isn’t.
Especially when you offer a good incentive.

Determine the key selling points your event has to offer attendees.
It could be a noteworthy speaker, skill sharing, an opportunity to network, and more.

Whatever you choose, make sure the value proposition is clear in your marketing.

Share the event details by email and on social media.
If you plan to run ads, target them strategically and choose the right format.
For example, LinkedIn’s InMail ads may be a better way to extend invitations than impersonal sponsored posts.

According to Adobe, registrations tend to spike two-to-three weeks before an event.
So it’s a good idea to ramp up around this time.


Take advantage of the social media tools available.
Create an event countdown in Instagram Stories.
Create a Facebook event with all the necessary information.
Consider listing your event on sites like Eventbrite and in other places your audience will come across them.

Speakers often double as influencers—so provide them with the details they need to become event ambassadors.
Always include who, what, where, and how.
That means no virtual event marketing should be without a link.
Whether it’s a link to registration form or your Instagram profile, show people where they need to go.

Don’t forget to share an event hashtag.
This will help people promote the event and drive conversations online.

Check out our complete guide to social media event promotion.

4.
Prepare for tech troubles


If physical events have hitches, virtual events have glitches.

Before kicking things off, test your Internet connection—and have your speakers do the same.
Prepare backups of visuals and presentations in case a file goes wonky or awol.
If possible, run a rehearsal.
The sooner you identify problems, the sooner you can identify solutions.

Remember that not all of your guests are tech savvy.
Anticipate the troubles people may have by preparing easy to follow guides or FAQs.
If you have the resources to provide support, even better.
Make sure it’s easy to find where and how to ask for help.

5.
Make it inclusive


Just like in-person events, virtual events should be as inclusive and accessible as possible.

Make sure clear language, large fonts, and high colour contrast is used at all touch points—including presentations.
Provide captions and visuals where possible for audio, and provide descriptions where possible for visuals.
Sites like Vfairs also include page narrations and allow text character sizes to be adjusted.

And this probably goes without saying by now, but if your event includes a panel of experts, try to avoid choosing exclusively cis white males.
Unless you want your event to trend for the wrong reasons, make sure your virtual event showcases a diverse range of voices.

Learn more about inclusive design for social media.

6.
Encourage engagement


It’s simple: If you create opportunities for engagement, your audience will be more engaged.
Why?
It’s fun to see the outcomes of your engagement.

Here’s a simple example: Ask viewers to submit questions in comments or through a chat tool.
Chances are the people who ask questions are going to stick around to see if they get answered.
Pro tip: If you do this, make sure to have a moderator assigned to the task of fielding questions.

Virtually every online platform has interactive features.
Ask people to participate in polls or quizzes.
Encourage live tweeting.
Take requests and suggestions.
Or simply shoutout names as people tune in.
And at the end of the event, ask for feedback.

Examples of virtual events hosted by businesses


Here are some examples of virtual events that businesses and influencers have hosted across social media and beyond.

The Microsoft founder’s seventh AMA event on Reddit got more than 110,000 upvotes.

This is Us

behind-the-scenes set tour


Stars Mandy Moore and Milo Ventimiglia use Facebook Live to take fans on a tour of the set of

This is Us

.

Benefit Cosmetics’ makeup tutorials on Facebook Live


More than 2.4K viewers tuned in to learn how to create a brow-mazing glow-up.

The Earful Tower Podcast’s live Pub Quiz


Oliver Gee, host of The Earful Tower podcast, hosts Parisian-themed trivia events from his YouTube channel—and even offers prizes for the winners.


Garth Brooks and Trisha Yearwood’s Facebook Live concert


The country superstars held a jam session on Facebook Live, taking requests from fans head of time and during the broadcast.

Antron Brown’s behind-the-scenes tour on Twitter


The NHRA driver showed Twitter viewers around his shop, which houses dragsters and trophies, among other gearhead treasures.

Live baking lessons from LinkedIn’s executive pastry chef


LinkedIn’s pastry chef shows members how to make croissants and bread pudding.


Purple Mattress’ sleepy Facebook Live


More than 295K people watched this 45-minute video of a woman yawning and brushing her wig.

Lunch Doodles by Mo Willems


Every day at lunchtime the Kennedy Center Education artist-in-residence hosts doodle sessions for kids on YouTube.


Lululemon’s Yoga livestreams


The yoga brand’s global ambassadors are leading workout, meditation, and yoga classes on Instagram live.


Online exhibitions by VanGogh Museum


The VanGogh Museum in Amsterdam lets followers take tours of gallery from the comfort of their couch.

British Museum opens its doors to Google Street View


More than 60 galleries of the British Museum can be visited from Google Street View.

Fire Drill Fridays goes virtual


Jane Fonda’s organization takes climate activism online with virtual rallies every Friday.

Girlboss Rally goes digital


Girlboss founder Sophia Amoruso plans to host her brand’s annual conference entirely online this year.


Skift’s Business Travel Online Summit


Skift will use Zoom to host this online summit featuring multiple speakers and attendees.
Guests have the opportunity to ask questions and will have access to a recording of the event.

3% Conference livestreamed presentations


This organization—founded to remedy the fact that only 3% of creative directors were women—offers livestreaming of its conferences for reduced costs.
The group also regularly hosts Instagram Story takeovers to inspire followers.


Hootsuite can help you promote your virtual events on social media and connect with attendees.
Schedule all of your social media posts, engage with followers, and measure performance from one dashboard.
Try it for free.



####
document number 3: 
Planning a Grand Opening Ceremony to Promote Your Business



Grand Opening


During construction, your community has likely become curious and has heightened support for your business’ success.
Community members will want to see what will happen in your building once you’re open for business.

Planning a grand opening ceremony or ribbon cutting ceremony is one way to capture the buzz and introduce your services or product to your neighbors, clients, suppliers and staff’s family.
Really, it’s the perfect time to get your prospective clients in the door and show them your brand new, fresh and clean facility.

Some industries, such as the restaurant segment, have found great success by holding grand reopenings every ten to twenty years to promote their business.
Many restaurant patrons want to try the most new and exciting thing in town, so almost as if it’s part of their promotion budget, some restaurant owners update their look and/or menu on a regular schedule (every ten to twenty years) to gain clientele quite successfully.

Over the past seven years working for a commercial contractor, I’ve attended many Grand Openings and they have done well at drawing in people and helping the business to put their best foot forward.
Grand Openings can be tricky to plan because guests are typically arriving at all different times.
Therefore, you need to have an activity planned, like a tour that can happen in cycles or display posters and photos that are self explanatory.

For the party planners, here are some tips for organizing your own Grand Opening Event:


Decide if you want a private or public event and publicize it to those you’d like to attend well in advance (a minimum of 2 weeks notice).


Build a social media presence (i.e. Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.)
and advertise your event there, while also promoting your pages during the Grand Opening to increase your online network.


Organize a ribbon cutting with formal speech by the owner and/or a building dedication.


Give tours of the building lead by staff members who explain what will be happening throughout the building and highlight specialized areas that will benefit clients.


Demonstrate your product or the operations of producing the product.


Provide informational handouts and logoed trinkets.


Host a reception with food, drink, and/or music for guests to stay longer and provide more opportunity for you to meet with them.


Photograph the event to use in a newsletter, on social media, or for historical purposes.


Consider your parking because you will likely have more guests than what your parking lot is typically meant to hold.
Perhaps a shuttle or valet parking could help get everyone safely to your event.



A few unique elements that I’ve seen at Grand Openings include a harpist playing throughout the reception, moonwalk structures to make the event more kid friendly, and a red carpet rented to make guests feel special.

Have you ever hosted your own Grand Opening or attended one that had a unique element to it?

Wolgast is a comprehensive general contractor located in Saginaw, Michigan.
We are specialized in Design/Build, Construction Management, General Construction, and Insurance Restoration in the markets of Restaurants, Schools, Medical, Dental, and Manufacturing.
For more than 65 years, we have provided our professional construction services throughout Michigan and beyond.
We are happy to discuss The Wolgast Way for your next project at 800-WOLGAST!



####
document number 4: 
'Our Schools Got Talent' started as a magic workshop which has now grown into ​a full blown talent fundraising show for schools.



PTA - Fundraising Opportunity.
'Our School's Got Talent'

This is a fundraising family event hosted by a member of The Magic Club of Great Britain

"See what they say below"











We have had another fantastic evening with Eugene who was compare and entertainer for our School's Got Talent show.
This was the 5th year running where Eugene has turned our school talent show into a school talent spectacular!!
It brought our school community together and make for an amazing and very different fundraising event.

Without Eugene, it would have been a stressful occasion for me - the teacher who organised and ran the event.

​Eugene took the strain away from me by ensuring that the the whole evening ran perfectly - I actually enjoyed the evening!

Eugene introduced each act with a careful balance of sensitivity and humour - a difficult balance but perfectly pitched.
Eugene included the parents in his comparing, weaving them into the event and making them feel special and proud of their children.
Eugene knew how to make the event fun and inspirational through his natural understanding of the situation and of people.

I felt very supported by Eugene's presence throughout the evening and he helped the emotional presentation aspect of the evening flow.

I could not recommend Eugene enough - he is a great talent.
His magic show, which gave the judges time to decide on the winning act, provided a time for everyone to sit back and enjoy some humour before the result was announced.
​ Thank you Eugene - we will definitely be asking you back again next year!!!

Thank you again and we will see you next year,

Anna

An evening of fun and laughter where the pupils are the stars.


‘Our School’s Got Talent’ has been one of the most successful fundraising events for schools.
It is sponsored by The Magic Club of Great Britain, hosted by one of our professional entertainer with the children being the stars of the show.

How does it work?


(We suggest) - Let your school council have responsibility for for the auditions, these can be run during the lunch break or after school.

The show is in two parts:- Part 1 is the 'Our School's Got Talent' competition, this is followed by a refreshment break which allows the judges to sort out the winners and school to make more money.
Part two is a 20 minute familymagic show for everyone, ending with the winners ceremony.

Additional incomes come from a raffle and parents buying (making a donation) their children's can produce artworks which can be exhibited which parents can buy.

Depending on ticket prices, raffle, refreshments and art sale schools can earn between £500 - £1,500+.

Call now to get your local authority price.
If you have got any questions please feel free to call Eugene Matthias on 07730 111111 or info@themagicclub.com




####
document number 5: 
Being a Black Student Union board member


I became a member of Black Student Union in my freshmen year.
I signed up at the fall involvement fair and knew from then on that I wanted to continue to be a part of this family.
When I was told that applications for the new executive board would be sent out, I immediately hopped right on it.

The interview process


I filled out the application and waited to hear back.
When I was told that I got an interview with the board about the position that I applied for I was ecstatic.
I went to my interview, extremely nervous but with high hopes.
I have always been passionate about black unity and liberation, so it was more than just a club for me.

It was an opportunity for me to share my passion with other students on campus who felt the same.
It was a way for me to connect with people and learn from them as well as them learning from me.
I was interviewed by two former board members.

The setting was professional and I knew that it wasn’t like any other interview.
They were trying to get a glimpse of my character in order to understand what kind of leader I would be.
After a few weeks, I got the email that I got the position and I would have training soon.
I was beyond excited and ready to start.

Stepping into my role


I didn’t officially step into my role until January of this year, 2019.
I knew that taking on the position would be a lot of hard work and very time consuming.
Even though it would be challenging being on an E-board of a club I was excited and willing.

Black Student Union Executive Board at first event "Rep your flag" party.
Photo submitted by Troi Patrick


Being the Vice President of retention and recruitment is a role that involves a lot of creative thinking and accountability.
I have to constantly be thinking of what members want and how to maintain an influx of new members.
I am constantly thinking of new ways to keep members happy and fulfilling the mission of the club.

We have member meetings every Thursday which we have to prepare for in advance.
We also have meetings for the executive board so that we can communicate with each other about other things we have planned other than member meetings.
Black Student Union takes up a good portion of my time, especially when we have events.

Black Student Union member meeting flyer.
Graphic by BSU


First event


Black Student Union "Rep your flag" party flyer.
Graphic by BSU


Our very first event was a party that we hosted on Saturday, Feb.
9, 2019 at Grace Hall.
Before the party there was a lot of preparation that took place.
Before being on the executive board and being a member I would go to Black Student Union parties and have a good time.
I would get dressed and simply show up.

For the party we hosted I learned to appreciate how much it took for the former board to host successful events.
All of the things that you never see play out are the most important parts of an event.
I realized that all of the small details could seriously effect the turnout of an event.

Lighting, music, promotion etc., all play a huge part in having a great party.
While planning this party we also have to cover all of the small details in events that we have coming up.
It takes a lot to a board member, but all of the hard work is worth it.



####
document number 6: 
Tet parade: Westminster grants permit despite LGBT group’s exclusion


Van Truong Phuc of Viet Rainbow of Orange County, an LGBT group, gets emotional during the public comment period of Wednesday’s Westminster City Council meeting.


At a meeting swirling with emotion, the Westminster City Council voted 5-0 to issue a permit to organizers of the 2014 Tet parade -- even if they refuse to allow LGBT people to march in the event.

The entire council voiced sympathy with those who might be barred from the celebration.
But Mayor Tri Ta said that as elected officials, the council members were required to uphold 1st Amendment rights, allowing a gathering that’s considered free speech.
However, he added, "we want to see the unity. ...
Let’s talk to find a solution."

Members of the most outspoken group at Wednesday’s meeting, Viet Rainbow of Orange County, challenged the Vietnamese American Federation of Southern California -- which applied for the special event permit -- calling it "an organization that has a history of discrimination, and has the potential to be a liability to the city."

Cathy Lam, speaking for Parents of Rainbow Children, a support group, pleaded with the City Council.

"We want everyone in the communities to treat our children with mutual respect, as they would expect us to do the same for theirs," she said.
Surrounded by other mothers, she added: "This walk in the parade is not just about LGBT rights.
It is neither about freedom of choices nor freedom of speech, but it is about our freedom from oppression, our freedom to be ourselves with dignity."

Council members attacked the federation for not being inclusive, but following advice from Westminster City Atty.
Dick Jones, said their hands were "legally tied."

The back-and-forth, which lasted for more than an hour at the meeting during public comment, didn’t sit well with Councilwoman Diana Carey, who said she had "spent my whole damn life fighting against discrimination."

"But having said that, I took an oath to support the Constitution and 1st Amendment rights," she said.
"As egregious as this is, I have to support this."

Echoing Carey, Councilman Andy Quach shared his concern that the controversy tarnishes the image of Westminster, where city officials stepped up to organize the parade in years past.
Now, facing a budget deficit of more than $3 million, leaders canceled both parades for Founders Day and Tet, opening up the way for private organizers.

Council members Quach and Margie Rice denounced those in the crowd of nearly 100 for putting "us on the defensive again."

It is the second year the council has had to struggle with the issue of LGBT exclusion.

Nghia X. Nguyen, who heads the federation, said his group applied to run the event "to share the traditional and social values of Vietnamese that has been passed on from generation to generation."
At the urging of city leaders, he agreed to sit down and talk with Viet Rainbow to find compromise.

"We are not difficult and do not want to be difficult," he said later.
"The conditions we set will be applied to everyone in the parade."

He referred to demands that LGBT participants should not show affection in public, along with not carrying signs that reflect political identity.

The LGBTs "abuse the Tet parade to show off," added Khoi Pham, a federation member who noted he actually voted in favor of their participation in a November meeting before his organization applied for an event permit.
"I have so much respect for freedom, but I still believe their group used this opportunity to spread propaganda."

Hieu Nguyen, a founder of Viet Rainbow, said he and his supporters are being unfairly targeted and that any code of conduct must be uniform.

"We cannot be silent anymore because we represent people who are still hiding, still living in the darkness," he said.

If there’s no LGBT presence in the parade, he and his peers asked the City Council to boycott the event.
Jeff LeTourneau, who chairs the LGBT caucus for Orange County’s Democratic party, backs him, saying his group unanimously passed a resolution pushing for all public officials to also withdraw from the event.

"This is so much bigger than this city," LeTourneau said, adding that LGBTs statewide "are watching."

ALSO:



####
document number 7: 
Initiation into Dartmouth Social Spaces – Dimensions Initiation Rituals



Title: Dimensions Initiation Rituals

General Information about Item:


Initiation Ritual


Dartmouth College Club


Informant: Ian Harris



Informant Data


Ian Harris is my good friend who I first met freshman year of high school in 2013.
Ian was born in Boston, Massachusetts on January 28

th

, 1999 and has lived in Boston with his family ever since.
Ian attended the Noble and Greenough School from grade 7 to 12 and he is currently a sophomore at Dartmouth College.
Ian plans to major in economics.
Ian’s father also attended Dartmouth College, but he was not in the club Dimensions.



Contextual Data


Cultural Context: I personally interviewed Ian in his dorm room at Dartmouth College.
Ian was first introduced to Dimensions as a senior in high school when he attended a Dimensions event in Boston to welcome the incoming Dartmouth students into the Dartmouth community.
This Dimensions event occurs every year in Boston and is attended by incoming Dartmouth students.
At this event, those that participated were the incoming Dartmouth students and the current Dartmouth students in Dimensions who perform different dances and songs.
After Ian discussed his experience with Dimensions as a senior in high school, Ian then elaborated on the initiation rituals for Dartmouth students joining the club.
Ian originally learned of these rituals by participating in the initiation process of Dimensions after being accepted into the club.
Ian was surrounded by the upperclassmen in Dimensions and the other new members of Dimensions while they participated in a hike to a cabin.


Social Context: I collected this initiation ritual from Ian Harris, a current member of Dimensions.
Ian is not the first person in his family to attend Dartmouth, but he is the first person in his family to be in Dimensions at Dartmouth.



Item


As a senior in high school, Ian was initiated into the community of Dartmouth College by attending the Dimensions event and watching the various dances that were performed by the Dartmouth students in Dimensions.
Ian felt more welcomed and initiated into the community after talking with different students in Dimensions, who attempted their best to initiate Ian into Dartmouth.
Then, after joining Dimensions, Ian was initiated into the club Dimensions by participating in an annual hike.
Ian and the members of Dimensions all hiked to a cabin in the woods and were then initiated into the club with a dinner at the cabin.



Analysis:


Initiation rituals consist of three stages: separation, transition, and incorporation.
In the first initiation ritual that Ian participated in, separation occurs when Ian leaves his high school community and goes to the Dimensions event in Boston.
The transition period occurs when Ian watches the various dances and performances put on by Dimensions and is welcomed into the Dartmouth community.
The incorporation stage then occurs after the performances when Ian is able to speak with current members of Dimensions and meet his fellow classmates.
Regarding the initiation ritual that Ian experiences as a member of Dimensions, separation occurs when Ian and the other members of Dimensions leave the Dartmouth campus to embark on the hike.
Then, the transition period happens when Ian hikes to the cabin where the initiation dinner is held.
Finally, the incorporation stage occurs when Ian eats dinner at the cabin with all of the Dimensions members and is officially initiated into the club.



Meaning and Interpretation:


Dimensions is an extremely important club on campus and being initiated into the club is a great way to bring the members of the club closer together.
As a senior in high school, the Dimensions performance to initiate incoming students to Dartmouth acts as a way to welcome incoming students and allow them to meet current students and fellow incoming freshman.



Comparison


Comparison within the subgroup:

In this sub-group, we focused on Dartmouth College social initiation rituals.
One similarity between most of these rituals is that they are experienced by freshmen.
A student’s freshman year is a time to learn about his or her new community and the traditions that form its unique culture.
Freshman year is also the time that most students join the clubs or sports teams that they will be most involved in throughout their Dartmouth careers.
Therefore, it makes sense that so many of the Dartmouth social initiation rituals take place during the freshman year, such as the homecoming bonfire ritual.
One difference within our subgroup is who initiates and runs each initiation ritual.
Sometimes these rituals are set up and funded by the Dartmouth administration, and sometimes they are student-run.
Another difference is the duration of each ritual.
Some social spaces take a while to initiate into or involve a few different rituals that initiate new members, whereas others only require one short ritual.




Comparison with the rest of the subgroups:

The subgroups differ dramatically across the board.
Some of the subgroups focus on various ethnic groups while others focus on groups within Dartmouth.
The initiation rituals of the groups within Dartmouth usually have the purpose of welcoming new members into their community and are symbolic.
Ethnic-based group rituals have the purpose of testing the new members.
Additionally, ethnic groups’ initiation rituals tend to be related to religious practices.
Initiation rituals of Dartmouth groups are not religious in character.
What all groups have in common though is the fact that the process of initiation creates closeness with the rest of the group and makes one feel completely immersed into the group.



Transcript


Ian Harris on the tradition of the initiation ritual into Dimensions, "That’s a tradition.
The upperclassmen that went with us did that too.
They’ve been doing this for as long as Dimensions has been around which is really cool because you have the same experience as older kids.



Collector: Reg Anderson, Dartmouth College, Russian 13, Professor Valentina Apresyan, Professor Mikhail Gronas, Fall 2018

Tags/Keywords


Dartmouth


Dartmouth Clubs


Freshman


Initiation Ritual




####
document number 8: 
PHP Agency is a Massive Pyramid Scheme &amp;amp; I’ll Prove It (Updated for 2020)






Here is what I will say.
It is gonna be long.

In terms of fees I will breakdown what has been paid to them directly since starting last year in August.
$199 getting started $25 Manual that was suggested to get but not pushed at me.
$150 (Not required to get started) I choice to go to an event, there were some people that didn’t go and yes it was expressed as a good training event.
I did learn a lot and heard from good speakers that are not part of the agency.
One speaker I heard from was David McKnight author of The Power of Zero.
I paid $374 directly to PHP.
If I didn’t go to the event in January it would have only been $224

Fees that were not paid to PHP but went with me becoming an insurance Agent: $44 Licencing Exam $48 Finger Printing through the state $20 pre-licensing course (required by the state to get a license {normally about $200 and we have a discount code through an approved prelicensing website}) I paid $112 to other companies.

I did pay $486 with this all totaled up (minus event $336).

Each state’s licensing costs different.
I am not sure that if you work for someone directly like Farmers or another company, if the company pays for the license, pre-license course, and finger printing or not.

Pay: I have only been paid on the policies that I have sold.
I have recruited people but I have not been paid to recruit.
If I got three people in today I would not be paid for them to get started.
If I found people that got bought a policy and didn’t get started then I would get paid.

The companies that I write policies for five different companies, one is Mutual of Omaha.
We have the ability to write for more but like cereal brands, if you are given 30 choices of the same brand, you end up just grabbing what looks good.
I haven’t made a lot because I haven’t concentrated with the company.
I had a part time job at a restaurant and did good money.
I honestly didn’t do much besides occasionally asking people if they were interested in hearing about it or if they were looking for a policy.

Right now that is the only thing I am doing because I am laid off of my job because of the virus.
I will still ask and people and if they say no I am ask a bit more and if they still say no then cool.
Because PHP is not a employee, employer strict setting there are differences between the agents and offices.
I am lucky that my office talks about product and we have had representatives from Companies that we write policies for come to the office I am based out of.
Also the top guy in our office doesn’t tell anyone you will be a millionaire in a year but say that it is work and you get in what you put out.

Could I possibly quit one day?
Maybe.
If I do I will take what I have learned and not bad mouth the office I leave.
I do feel bad though for the people that end up at unchecked offices though.



####
document number 9: 
Photojournalists Lay Down Their DSLRs as a Protest in South Korea



When Japan and South Korea signed a pact on military intelligence sharing last week, authorities decided to do the signing in private, closing off the ceremony to the press.
Unhappy about this decision, photojournalists decided to protest the media blackout by laying down their cameras.

As Japanese ambassador Yasumasa Nagamine arrived at the South Korean Defense Ministry in Seoul on November 23th, 2016, he entered the doors to find a tunnel formed by a line of photojournalists on both sides.
The photographers had just been told after arriving at the venue that they wouldn’t be allowed to shoot the actual signing of the pact.

Angered by this last-minute notice, the photographers collectively decided to boycott covering the ambassador’s arrival.
At the photographers’ feet were their DSLR cameras, symbolically laid on the ground to show that they were refusing to cover the event.

Instead of using press photographers, the South Korean government decided to release their own photos of the event shot by defense ministry officials.

Image credits: Photograph by Kyodo News via Getty Images



####
document number 10: 
I Had a Book Signing and Launch Party and Here’s What Happened


Finding a creative way to celebrate the release of my first book,

50 Things to Do in Baby’s First Year

, was on my radar from day one.
I’m not one to toot my own horn and I’ve never thrown my own party before, but I feel like writing a book and getting it published is a significant accomplishment that deserves a little celebration.

So, what better way to share the excitement of seeing your book in print with your friends and family than to have a party where your book is the guest of honor?!

Since my book is about having a baby, I decided to call my book launch party a book shower – like a baby shower.
Guests were asked to bring gifts in the form of diapers (to donate to the Faith House for use by moms in need), and we played baby shower type games while there.

If you missed it, here are a few highlights and photos from the evening.

Everything That Happened at My Launch Party and Book Signing


with Owner of the Original Playhouse in New Market, MD


Book Launch Party Venue


To stay on theme, I decided to host my book launch party at a local children’s museum called The Original Playhouse.
With it’s child-centered, whimsical decor I thought it would be a perfect location to celebrate the launch of a book about becoming a parent.

If you live in Frederick, Maryland and have young kids you should definitely take a trip to The Original Playhouse in New Market.

Book Launch Party Food


As is typical at baby showers, I wanted the fare at my book shower to be light and of the finger food variety.

A quick trip to Sam’s Club took care of most of the edibles, so I could focus on the dessert!


Thanks to the ingenuity of my bff who made the super creative donut stands and the generosity of Dunkin’ Donuts who kindly donated all of the donut desserts at my event, the dessert was quite a hit.

Book Launch Party Fun


I didn’t want my guests to spend too much time getting bogged down with games, but I did want to make sure we kept to the theme by having a little baby shower inspired fun!


We played the "Can’t Say It" game.
Guests were given a clothes pin when they arrived and informed that the word book was off limits.
Anyone who got caught saying it had to relinquish their clothes pin.
The person with the most pins at the end of the event was the winner and given a gift!

Book Signing



As my official first ever live book signing, I spent a little time chatting with guests about the book and signing their purchased copies.
It was pretty neat to get to write my name inside of my very own book for the first time.

Since everyone wasn’t able to attend the event, I am also doing a signed copy giveaway this week on my social channels!
If you’d like to win, be sure you click over to Facebook to enter!



####
document number 11: 
Receiving playtest feedback: Unpub and more


I have three stories about receiving game feedback to share today: Two Unpubs and one blind playtest.

Unpub 3 in Delaware: Chaos Alchemy


I learned last week, to my surprise, that my first game, Chaos Alchemy, was available to try at Unpub 3 this past January in Delaware.
As you may know, Game Salute is in the process of getting ready to publish Chaos Alchemy, and they were apparently at Unpub 3 with games in tow, including mine.
I had no idea it had been available there until this past week, when John Moller, the Unpub coordinator, mentioned that he had some feedback forms from Chaos Alchemy from that event.
How cool!









There were only two forms, but the players seemed to get the game easily and to have a good time with it.
My favorite was the place on the second form where the player mentioned liking the game, and listed "Random / dice games" as his/her least favorite type of games.
If you hate random/dice games and you still enjoyed Chaos Alchemy (which is very random and uses lots of dice), then it’s a good game.

Blind playtest feedback: Alchemy Bazaar

I’m not going into a lot of detail on this one, but I sent a copy of Alchemy Bazaar to a friend in Florida for blind playtesting.
That is, I sent a copy of the game with the rules and all of the components and asked my friend to try it with a group, without me providing any input beyond the rules as written.


There’s no easy way to put this; it didn’t go well.
When I’ve taught the game in person, it’s been a big hit all around.
But the blind playtest just didn’t work, and it was almost entirely because of the rules.
Lesson learned: I need to get much, much better at writing rules.
I’m working hard on this, and I’m confident that I’ll get the rules to where they need to be.
If I have any blog readers who are interested in giving my updated rules a read-through and providing feedback, let me know in the comments!
I’d love the extra set of eyes on the rules.

Unpub Mini Enchanted Grounds: Alchemy Bazaar

The most fun bit of playtest feedback I’ve gotten recently at Unpub Mini Enchanted Grounds, which was an event this past Saturday at my friendly local game store.
I was basically the organizer of the event, as well as a demonstrator of a game.
We had six games going at a time: five designers who were there for the whole six hours, and a pair of designers who traded off the first six hours and the last six hours (so, a total of seven games).

Things started off a bit slowly, and I played the role of host, talking to people who came into the store and shepherding them to games that they would likely enjoy based on their preferences.
Eventually I got to start demoing Alchemy Bazaar, and had the chance to run a total of three games.

Alchemy Bazaar in action at Unpub Mini.
Note the game board for my super-rough game Everest in the foreground.


Two of those games were won by a guy who had first tried the game the week before at Tabletop Game Day.
He liked it so much that he came back this week and played it twice more.
Definitely a good sign!

The feedback forms from this event were very positive.
One of the games ran a bit longer than I would have liked, and that was reflected in one of the feedback forms, but that’s fine; I can tweak the length easily enough.

Unpub Mini was a rousing success for all involved, I think.
Lots of players came through the store to play lots of games.
Some, like Mighty Heroes and the Monster Zone, were very polished in terms of production values and will soon be on Kickstarter.
Others, like my own Alchemy Bazaar, were in earlier prototype stages, but still complete games.
I didn’t get a chance to actually play any of the other games, but I at least got to talk to the designers and learn how the games work.

Frankly, I’m just happy to have met some other local board game designers!
I think we’ll be getting together again in the not-too-distant future.

Dealing with feedback

Through this process, I’ve learned some lessons about productively dealing with playtest feedback.
The positive feedback is useful because it tells you what elements of the game are working, so that you can be careful not to change those too much.
The negative feedback is even more useful because it tells you where you need to focus your efforts.
I’ll admit that I took the negative feedback hard and was feeling pretty down, but I eventually buckled down and fixed what was broken (or at least worked hard to fix it; I don’t know how fixed it is yet).

So, through it all I think I’m continuing to grow as a game designer.
That’s the hope, anyway!

Michael Iachini, the OnlineDM



####
document number 12: 
Simple Multiplatform RPC with Kotlin Serialization


I recently played a minor role in helping add Cast support to an Android app.
Both the Android app and Cast display are written in Kotlin.
The Android Cast SDK relays JSON strings to the JavaScript SDK which invokes your callback with the deserialized equivalent as a JS object.
A multiplatform library holds the model objects so that they can be shared between Android and JS.

class Game( val players: Array

) class Player( val name: String, val color: String, val scores: Array

)


Moshi serializes the models to JSON in the Android app.

val game = Game(arrayOf( Player("Jesse", "#ff0000", arrayOf(1, 2, 3)), Player("Matt", "#ff00ff", arrayOf(3, 0, 2)) ))

val gameAdapter = moshi.adapter(Game::class.java) val gameJson = gameAdapter.toJson(game) // {"players":[{"name":"Jesse",...},{"name":"Matt",...}]}

castSdk.send(gameJson)


The Cast app receives the deserialized JS object and interprets it as being of the same type.

castSdk.addCustomMessageListener { message -> val game = message.data.unsafeCast

() ui.render(game) }


This works but imposes some severe limitations.
The model objects can only use collections available natively to JS which means

Array

s instead of

List

s.
Custom serialization is also not supported because the JSON to JS object conversion was happening outside the library.

It was clear this setup wasn’t going to work long-term.

Kotlin Serialization


kotlinx.serialization is Kotlin’s multiplatform, reflection-free, format-agnostic serialization library.
Its compiler plugin generates code for types which are annotated as

@Serializable

.

+@Serializable class Game( val players: Array

) +@Serializable class Player( val name: String,


Updating the Android app requires specifying that we’re using the JSON format and supplying a reference to the generated serializer.

Normally in this situation, changing the serialization library would only affect the Android app since the Cast SDK internally parses JSON to JS objects.
However, kotlinx.serialization has the unique feature of being able to "parse" a JS object.

This walks the object properties as if it were JSON and passes them through the serializer.
Now we can use all of the features of the library from custom serializers to simple things like using a

List

.

This future-proofed the app to ensure that its models could continue to be shared even as they grew in complexity.
And they were about to.

The Cast app started as a stateless rendering of the game model but it lacked some of the Android app’s flair.
Instead of sending only the bare model, the Android app was changed to send an event.
This allowed showing animations on the Cast display after an action.
Each event contained a copy of the game model as well as any other information about the event.

The type will determine the behavior of the Cast app in response to these events.

Unfortunately this does not work as-is.
When serialized, the root JSON object contains only the properties of the object and not which specific type was serialized.

You can try to infer the type from which properties are present but it’s a brittle setup.

This is generally solved by using something called "polymorphic serialization" which uses some kind of marker to encode which type was serialized.
In kotlinx.serialization 0.14.0, the compiler automatically enables polymorphic serialization for Kotlin sealed hierarchies so it’s an obvious choice.

The JSON will now include a discriminator, a string identifying which type was used, so that the deserialization code picks the corresponding type on the other side.
By default the library uses array-based discriminators (but you could elect to add a property to the object itself).

Additionally, by using a sealed class, Kotlin can now enforce that a

when

on the event types is exhaustive

1

.

kotlinx.serialization 0.20.0 added support for polymorphic serialization in

DynamicObjectParser

allowing the Cast app to take advantage of it.

This setup creates a pretty robust unidirectional RPC system for the Android app to talk to the Cast display.
The build will fail if you forget to handle a new event on the Cast side.
The sending code and transport don’t need updated for new events since it’s all based on the

GameEvent

supertype.

With the Cast SDK imposing JSON and automatic deserialization to JS objects, the feature set of Kotlin serialization fits right in.
It allows maximizing code reuse without imposing too much complexity.
And, granted, it’s just about the most basic RPC system you could build, but it serves the app well.
Supporting requirements like associated responses and bidirectional streaming is better left to more heavyweight systems like gRPC.



####
document number 13: 
Fyre Festival: How a 25-year-old scammed investors out of $26 million


In April 2017, roughly 5,000 people spent hundreds to thousands of dollars for tickets to what they thought would be the experience of a lifetime: a luxury music festival in an idyllic tropical setting on a private island in the Bahamas.

Promotions for the much-hyped event, called Fyre Festival, promised "a place where the tropical sun shines all day, and our celebrations ignite the night.
This is an invitation to unplug, connect with something deeper, and hunt for something bigger."

Festival-goers were promised a real-life island fantasy with luxury accommodations, gourmet food and the chance to party with celebrities like rapper Ja Rule and models Kendall Jenner and Bella Hadid.
But the reality was closer to a disaster that played out in real-time on social media: Thousands of attendees arrived in the Bahamas to find disorganization as fellow festival-goers scrambled to claim a limited number of tents (rather than the luxury villas they’d been promised), some with bare, soaking-wet mattresses that had been left outside in the rain.


Instead of the "local seafood, Bahamian-style sushi, and even a pig roast" that was advertised, photos showing cold cheese sandwiches in foam containers went viral.
And rather than "an immersive music festival [over] two transformative weekends," the many A-list musical acts promoted as headliners by Fyre Festival’s organizers — among them, rappers Pusha T, Tyga, and Migos, as well as the band Blink-182 — dropped out in the days leading up to the event.

Attendees started leaving en masse and images and videos of distraught and disappointed ticket holders swept social media.

"In the concert industry, there has never been anything that remotely rivals the disaster that the Fyre Festival became," Bryan Burrough, a special correspondent for Vanity Fair, tells CNBC’s "American Greed."

The disastrous Fyre Festival spawned lawsuits against the event’s organizers, who included Ja Rule and Fyre Media CEO Billy McFarland, the latter of whom is now serving a six-year prison sentence for fraud.
Fyre Festival is the subject of the latest episode of CNBC’s "American Greed," which aired on Monday.

Here’s how it went down.

VIDEO3:0303:03

CNBC’s ‘American Greed’ takes a deep dive into the college admissions scandal

Squawk Box

Who is Billy McFarland?


Fyre Media CEO Billy McFarland

Patrick McMullan | Getty Images

McFarland, now 27, grew up in New Jersey, where his parents run a real estate development company, and he briefly attended Bucknell University before dropping out after less than a year.
McFarland presented himself as a successful serial entrepreneur, having launched multiple high-profile ventures before he turned 25.
But FBI agent John Casale, who oversaw the criminal investigation into Fyre Festival and McFarland, calls McFarland a "serial fraudster" who launched a series of scams that the government says defrauded over 100 investors out of more than $26 million.

Before Fyre Festival, McFarland had made a name for himself in 2013 by launching a credit card venture called Magnises, which sold clients an invite-only black card (meant to be a financial status symbol similar to the American Express Centurion, or Black, credit card, but for millennials).
He promised it would give them access to exclusive parties and VIP events as well as discounts at posh restaurants and clubs for a membership fee of $250 a year.
However, critics pointed out that Magnises was not a real standalone credit card (it simply copied the magnetic strip of clients’ original cards and all charges reverted back to those cards), and Bloomberg noted in one report that it was "never clear" exactly how many members Magnises had.

When Magnises began to stall due to customer complaints and defections, McFarland launched a new company, called Fyre Media, in 2016 and teamed with rapper Ja Rule (whose real name is Jeffrey Atkins).
Fyre Media touted a celebrity booking app that promised to connect users looking to book musical artists like Jay-Z and Beyonce for private events with the touch of a button.

Fyre Media cofounders Billy McFarland and rapper Ja Rule (real name Jeffrey Atkins) pose with Aisha Atkins.

Patrick McMullan | Getty Images

How authorities say things went down


McFarland and Atkins decided to launch Fyre Festival in the Bahamas as a splashy venture to help promote the Fyre Media app.
In late-2016, McFarland began soliciting investors to back both the app and the festival, though he later admitted to prosecutors that he "made repeated misrepresentations to investors" about his business while lying to them about how much money he had in place to put on the festival and telling them that Fyre Media was already worth at least $90 million.

McFarland also claimed he’d sold Magnises for up to $40 million, but "in reality, he did not sell Magnises and that was a lie to the investors," Casale says.

McFarland also lied to investors by telling them they would have the right to a payout should the festival be cancelled, when in fact he’d secured no cancellation insurance policies, the Justice Department said.

In reality, McFarland had reportedly grossly underestimated the cost and time it would take to organize a music festival on the scale that Fyre Festival’s glossy promotions would promise.
Despite warnings from vendors and contractors that it would take over a year to plan and execute Fyre Festival, McFarland still decided to go full steam ahead on his plan to pull off the event in a matter of months.

While McFarland’s greatest talent was "selling himself," according to Vanity Fair correspondent Burrough, McFarland was also "just stunningly ignorant of what it would take to make his promises a reality."

"In his own mind, he was too big to fail," says the FBI’s Casale.

Meanwhile, McFarland set about marketing the event by paying to fly supermodels Bella Hadid, Emily Ratajkowski, Allesandra Ambrosio and others on a private plane to the Bahamas for a promotional photo shoot that would frame Fyre Festival as the luxury experience McFarland wanted prospective attendees to think it was.
In the months leading up to the festival, Fyre Media even paid numerous celebrities and influencers to tout the festival on their social media accounts, including a reported $250,000 payment to Kendall Jenner for just one Instagram post that she sent out to her more than 100 million followers.


A few weeks before Fyre Festival, McFarland’s company defaulted on a nearly $3 million loan (according to a lawsuit later filed by lender EHL Funding), while a potential investment from Comcast Ventures, worth up to $20 million, fell through at the last minute, with the venture capital firm saying it had passed on the investment "after conducting thorough due diligence."

With a lack of actual capital, Fyre Media (which the government says only booked $57,443 in revenue between May 2016 and April 2017) was forced to cut corners on the luxury festival McFarland had promised to thousands of attendees, while also stiffing numerous vendors who had performed work (from on-site construction to event planning and marketing) on McFarland’s promise of being paid once more investments came in.

In the end, the failure of Fyre Festival and McFarland’s misrepresentation of Fyre Media ended up costing McFarland’s investors (including Atkins, aka Ja Rule) more than $26 million, authorities said.
McFarland, who admitted to falsifying documents, including bank statements, that he showed to investors in order to secure their funds, pleaded guilty in 2018 to three counts of wire fraud, one count of bank fraud and a charge of making false statements.
(Amazingly, McFarland actually had to plead guilty twice, because prosecutors found that he was operating a fraudulent ticketing scam while out on bail from his initial charges stemming from Fyre Media.
McFarland’s follow-up scam offered to sell tickets to high-profile events like the Grammy Awards and the Met Gala despite not holding tickets.)

In October 2018, McFarland was sentenced to six years in prison and ordered to pay more than $26 million in restitution to the investors and customers he defrauded.
McFarland also reached a settlement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission over fraud charges in July 2018, with McFarland agreeing to a lifetime ban on him ever serving as a director or officer of a public company.

McFarland apologized during his sentencing, saying his actions were a result of his "fear of letting everybody down."

However, the SEC noted in a statement announcing McFarland’s settlement that the Fyre Media cofounder "used investor funds to bankroll a lavish lifestyle including living in a Manhattan penthouse apartment, partying with celebrities, and traveling by private plane and chauffeured luxury cars."

Meanwhile, many Fyre Festival attendees have told reporters over the past two years that they have not been able to secure a refund for the tickets they purchased, though some say they’ve had luck getting refunds by going through their banks or credit card companies to dispute charges.

At the same time, a $100 million class action lawsuit filed in May 2017 by ticket holders against the rapper Atkins and Fyre Media’s chief marketing officer, Grant Margolin, was dismissed in July 2019 by a federal judge who said the lawsuit did not produce enough evidence to prove those organizers knew the event would be a disaster.
At least one separate lawsuit, however, netted a multimillion-dollar judgment for two attendees against McFarland, while others remain ongoing.

Atkins and other Fyre Media executives have not faced any criminal charges stemming from Fyre Festival, with the rapper even saying that he himself was scammed by McFarland and lost an undisclosed amount of money investing in the venture.

Meanwhile, Margolin and Daniel Simon (an independent contractor, and high school friend of McFarland’s, who had a role in Magnises, Fyre Media, and the festival) both agreed to deals with the SEC to settle charges over their roles in the fraud.
Margolin agree to pay a $35,000 civil penalty and to a seven-year ban on him serving as either a director or officer of any public company, while Simon agreed to pay a $15,000 disgorgement and penalty as well as a three-year ban on being a director or officer of any public company.

Similarly, none of the models or celebrities who promoted Fyre Festival have faced any charges, though a New York bankruptcy judge did rule in January 2019 that Jenner and the agencies representing models Hadid, Ratajkowski and others could be subpoenaed by Fyre Media’s bankruptcy trustee in order to determine exactly how much money each of those models and influencers received from McFarland and Fyre Media to help market the doomed festival.
Including Jenner’s six-figure payment for a single Instagram post, Fyre Festival paid out more than $5.2 million in total to influencers and prospective celebrity performers, court records show.

Watch new episodes of CNBC’s "

American Greed

″ Mondays at 10 p.m. ET/PT.

Don’t Miss:

The island that was used to promote the Fyre Festival is on sale for $11.8 million

How an ex basketball coach tried to pull off the biggest college admissions scam ever, allegedly roping in CEOs and celebs

Like this story?

Subscribe to CNBC Make It on YouTube!


VIDEO3:3603:36

What it’s really like to go to Burning Man

Make It



####
document number 14: 
Barrington Illinois Event Planner | Christina Currie Events






####
document number 15: 
Inaugural ICAO Treaty Event leads to 14 depositary actions



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = military coup
document number 1: 
Sudan's President Bashir forced out in military coup



(CNN)After three decades of rule, Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir has been arrested and forced from power in a military coup.

Bashir's government has been dissolved, and a military council has assumed control for two years to oversee a transition of power, Sudanese Defense Minister Awad Mohamed Ahmed Ibn Auf said in a televised statement Thursday.

The President's removal comes amid a popular uprising against his rule that has seen thousands take to the streets across the northeastern African country.
The largely peaceful protests have escalated in recent days as armed government groups engaged in deadly clashes.

As news of Bashir's ouster spread, people flooded the streets of Khartoum, the capital, in celebration, according to social media reports and witnesses on the ground.

Those jubilant scenes came to an abrupt halt after the coup announcement, however, according to a CNN stringer on the ground.
Chanting against the defense minister began shortly after the military's announcement.

A three-month state of emergency has been declared, and a one-month curfew from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m. put in place.
Airspace and crossings will be closed for 24 hours, and medical facilities will be secured.

Sudan's Cabinet, its National Assembly and municipal bodies have been dissolved, and the country's constitution suspended, Ibn Auf said.
The judiciary, public prosecution, embassies and diplomatic entities will continue to function as normal.

All political prisoners, detained by security services since the wave of anti-government demonstrations gripped the nation in December, will be released, the defense minister added.

At 3:30 a.m. Thursday, Bashir was visited by the heads of his four main security apparatuses and was told "there was no alternative" but for him to step down, two senior military sources with direct knowledge of the conversation told CNN.

According to the sources, Bashir responded by saying "with the blessings of God," an expression of acquiescence in Islamic tradition.

This woman has come to symbolize Sudan's protests


Bashir is under house arrest, according to sources.
His personal guard has been replaced and is under close watch, sources added.
Sudanese Prime Minister Mohamed Taher Ayala and Ahmed Haroun, the head of the ruling National Congress Party, were among dozens of officials who were also arrested, a top military official with direct knowledge of the arrests told CNN.

The Sudanese Intelligence Agency said it ordered the release of all political detainees, the official Sudan News Agency, or SUNA, reported Thursday.
More than 3,000 people have been arrested since protests began in December, based on testimony CNN gathered from activists, lawyers and victims.

But a group that has been leading the protests, the Sudanese Professionals Association, or SPA, rejected the "coup declaration," and has called on people to press on with demonstrations and to stage a sit-in outside military headquarters.
The group said protests would continue until "power is handed over to a civilian transitional government."

"The regime has conducted a military coup to reproduce the same faces and entities that our great people have revolted against," the SPA, an umbrella organization of doctors, lawyers and journalists, said in a statement.

"Those who destroyed the country and killed its people want to appropriate every drop of blood shed by the great people of Sudan during their revolution," it said.

"This is a game on the Sudanese people.
The street refuses totally the announcement by Ibn Auf," activist Omar al-Neel told CNN.
"All Sudanese people are in the street and demanding the downfall of the regime and not recycling the same people."

On Friday morning, the UN Security Council is set to discuss developments in Sudan in closed door discussions, according to the United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations.

Jonathan Allen, UK deputy permanent representative to the United Nations, said Thursday that "the main message again is there must be no violence against those protesters."

"The change proposed by the military isn't enough.
It's not enough to say that it's a two-year transition to civilian rule is adequate," Allen said.
"We need to see much faster transition.
We need to see civilian rule now.
That's what the protesters have been calling for, and that is what we need to do."

US State Department spokesperson Robert Palladino also said on Thursday that "the Sudanese people should determine who leads them and their future," and that they "should be allowed to do so sooner than two years from now."

Egypt's Foreign Ministry has issued a statement in support of the developments in Sudan, emphasizing it stands by "all choices made by the brotherly people of Sudan," and saying it has "full confidence" in the ability of the people of Sudan and "their loyal national army in overcoming this critical state."
The Egyptian army played a pivotal role in the 2011 revolution that toppled Hosni Mubarak and in the 2013 coup against his successor Mohamed Morsy.

Bashir took control after a coup in 1989 and became President in 1993.
He stands accused of conducting a campaign of ethnic cleansing in the country's Darfur region, and was nearly arrested in 2015 while visiting South Africa.
He faces five counts of crimes against humanity and two counts of war crimes in connection to Sudanese military actions in Darfur.

The International Criminal Court has issued two arrest warrants for him and considers him to be "at large."
On Thursday, Human Rights Watch called on Sudanese authorities to execute those warrants.

Sudan's Omar al-Bashir faces five counts of crimes against humanity and two counts of war crimes.


Protests started over the rising costs of living but escalated into a push for Bashir's removal from office, with mass rallies and sit-ins outside the presidential compound and army headquarters.
In February, Bashir declared a yearlong state of emergency in response to the protests.

This week's sit-in had grown into one of the biggest rallies since the uprising began, with crowds braving temperatures of more than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius) to camp out in the streets of the capital.

On Tuesday, members of the Sudanese army moved in to protect protesters in Khartoum after national security forces attempted to break up the third day of a mass sit-ins.

Earlier in the week, the mood among protesters outside the compound had verged on victorious, with people chanting "thawra" (revolution) and waving the national flag aloft as soldiers watched footage from the scene showed.

Photos captured protesters sitting atop military vehicles and handing out water bottles as others posed for selfies with members of the armed forces, flashing V-for-victory gestures.

A CNN team visited Khartoum undercover last month, where it heard reports of possible war crimes by security forces attempting to quell demonstrations.

Sudanese protesters cheer Thursday for passing soldiers near military headquarters in Khartoum.


The Central Committee of Sudan Doctors said 22 people, including five soldiers, were killed in mass protests since Saturday.

Sudan's government has reported some 32 fatalities since the protests began this year, including three security personnel, but doctors and opposition activists suggest the toll is 78, excluding the military.

Sudan has sought to censor news coverage of protests, and journalists reporting on the demonstrations risk life imprisonment and the death penalty.



####
document number 2: 
Net Gain or No Gain?


Zimbabwe’s Coup


Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Retired Ambassador D.
Bruce Wharton, Retired

Members of parliament celebrate 21 November 2017 after President Robert Mugabe’s resignation in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Mugabe was swept from power as his thirty-seven-year reign of brutality and autocratic control crumbled within days of a military takeover.
The bombshell news was delivered by the parliament speaker to a special joint session of the assembly that had convened to impeach Mugabe, who had dominated every aspect of Zimbabwean public life since the country’s independence in 1980.
(Photo by Jekesai Njikizana, Agence France-Presse)


The scene in downtown Harare, Zimbabwe, on 21 November 2017 was extraordinary.
Thousands walked through the streets, cheering, waving Zimbabwean flags, greeting soldiers as heroes, and taking selfies with military personnel in armored vehicles.
Exuberance, not fear, ruled the streets of Harare.
Members of parliament, including those from the ruling party, Zimbabwe African National Union-Patriotic Front (ZANU-PF), ululated and danced in the aisles.

Robert Mugabe’s resignation had just been announced by the speaker of parliament, ending a week of fear and uncertainty.

1

Zimbabwe exploded in jubilation in the belief that the long national nightmare of poor governance, corruption, and economic mismanagement was finally ending.
Three days later, the coup (and it was a coup) was sanctified when the High Court of Zimbabwe ruled that the military’s actions were "constitutionally permissible and lawful."

2


In the background, almost drowned out by the cheering of most Zimbabweans, were words of caution.
Former minister of education and human rights lawyer David Coltart warned, "In all of our euphoria we must never become so intoxicated as to forget that it was the same generals who allowed Mugabe to come to power in 2008 and 2013."

3

And, "Once any change of power in any nation comes through a means other than the strict fullfillment of the constitution, in letter and spirit, a dangerous precedent is set, which is hard to reverse."

4

Lawyer and political analyst Alex Magaisa wrote that the Zimbabwean Supreme Court’s decision on the coup amounted to "effectively legalizing military intervention in the affairs of government."

5


So, why were most Zimbabweans so pleased to see Robert Mugabe and his wife Grace pushed from power?
And why was it not a good thing that Zimbabwe’s military forced Mugabe’s resignation?
Let’s look at how Zimbabwe got to November 2017 and what has happened in over a year since then.

War and Independence


Robert Mugabe dedicated his life to ending racist minority rule in Zimbabwe.
He joined the ZANU party in 1960, was imprisoned by the Rhodesian government in 1964 for his political activities, and fled to Mozambique in 1974.
By the late-1970s, it was becoming evident that majority rule would eventually come to Rhodesia, but it was not clear whether Mugabe or his rival revolutionary leader, Joshua Nkomo of the Zimbabwe African People’s Union (ZAPU), would emerge as the national leader.
Ambassador Johnnie Carson, then the deputy chief of mission at the U.S. embassy in Mozambique, was the first official American to meet with Mugabe.
He and the late Congressman Stephen Solarz met Mugabe and two of his chief lieutenants at a deserted airstrip in Quelimane, Mozambique, in July 1976 and left that meeting convinced that Mugabe would prevail as Zimbabwe’s eventual leader.
"He was ruthless and surrounded himself with people who would kill for him," Carson said later.

6


Joice Mujuru speaks 9 December 2012 at the Horasis Global Arab Business Meeting in Ras Al Khaimah, United Arab Emirates.
Mujuru was the vice president of Zimbabwe from 2004 to 2014.
(Photo by Richter Frank-Jurgen via Wikimedia Commons)


As Rhodesia transformed into Zimbabwe-Rhodesia in 1979, and into independent, majority-ruled Zimbabwe in 1980, Ambassador Carson’s prediction proved accurate.
Mugabe became prime minister in 1980, then president in 1987.
Whatever title he bore, Mugabe was clearly the man in charge.

Mugabe’s speech at Zimbabwe’s independence in April 1980 focused on peace and reconciliation.

7

It drew sighs of relief from white Zimbabweans and the West.
Mugabe was eloquent, highly educated, and seemed eminently reasonable.
He was the very model of a modern African leader—a technocrat and the antithesis of corrupt, venal leaders such as Congo’s Mobutu Sese Seko.
The West swooned.

Troubled Rule, Economic Disaster


Viewed in hindsight, however, all was not well.
Mugabe’s control of the media coupled with global attention moving on to other hot spots in the mid-1980s obscured the trouble in Zimbabwe.
Ethno-political tension between Mugabe’s Shona-dominated ZANU on one side and Joshua Nkomo’s Ndebele-focused ZAPU on the other devolved into a conflict that killed as many as twenty thousand people in the mid-1980s.
Most of the casualties were Ndebele civilians in southwestern Zimbabwe, and most of the violence was at the hands of a brigade of Shona-majority Zimbabwean troops trained by North Korea.
Those who threatened Mugabe’s power, people like ZANU guerilla commander Josiah Tongogara, retired Army Chief of Staff Solomon Mujuru, former Vice President Joice Mujuru, and others found themselves demoted or the victims of suspicious accidents.
(Tongogara died in a car accident in 1979, Solomon Mujuru died in a fire in 2011, and Joice Mujuru was dismissed from the vice presidency in 2014.)
Carson’s assessment of Mugabe’s ruthlessness and the willingness of his associates to kill on his behalf was accurate.

Zimbabwe, once the largest exporter of agricultural products in southern Africa, could no longer meet its own food requirement.
‘From breadbasket to basket case’ became the standard descriptor of the country.


By the late-1990s, Mugabe’s mismanagement of the economy and his poor relations with international financial institutions (IFIs) and donor nations had significantly weakened Zimbabwe.
Declining standards of living and life expectancy (lower in 2000 than in 1980) and growing out-migration of skilled workers were outward signs of Zimbabwe’s decline.

8

As the formal economy and the living conditions of the middle and working classes declined, Mugabe built a system of political patronage and tolerated corruption and rent-seeking activities among his supporters.
In 1998, Mugabe sent the military to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the government of Laurent Kabila.
This exercise cost Zimbabwean taxpayers about $1 million per day, but made rich men of the politically connected senior Zimbabwean military officers who were given contracts and concessions for mining, agriculture, and transportation.

9

In 2000, angered that white commercial farmers were providing funding to the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) party, Mugabe unleashed his supporters against the farmers and gave significant land to military, judges, government ministers, and other political supporters.
His so-called "fast-track" land reform program amounted to payoffs to political supporters and a return to subsistence agriculture for the working class.
Zimbabwe, once the largest exporter of agricultural products in southern Africa, could no longer meet its own food requirement.
"From breadbasket to basket case" became the standard descriptor of the country.

10


The Military Develops Corporate and Political Power


In 1997, Mugabe revived a Rhodesian-era institution, the Joint Operations Command (JOC).
The JOC was nominally created to manage overall national security and included the defense minister; the chiefs of the army and air force, national police, and prisons; and the director of national intelligence.
Created to ensure coordination among the security services, the JOC became the de facto guarantor of Mugabe and ZANU’s continued rule.
The JOC developed strategies to influence elections in 2000, 2002, 2005, 2008, and 2013, and it directed the military’s work to intimidate voters, produce loyal or "correct" votes, and manage Election Day intelligence and official reporting of results.

Then president of Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe and his wife, Grace Mugabe, on 4 August 2013.
(Photo by DandjkRoberts via Wikimedia Commons)


The 2008 election was particularly violent.
Tens of thousands of people were displaced, and more than two hundred people were killed by political violence.
Even with this level of intimidation, and electoral results that were withheld for four weeks, Mugabe failed to capture a majority and was forced into a runoff against opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai.
Credible reporting at the time held that Mugabe wanted to concede the election (which Tsvangirai almost certainly won in the first round) but that the JOC, securocrats, and beneficiaries of Mugabe’s patronage system refused to allow his concession.

Some observers of Zimbabwe believe these events were a de facto coup, and that by mid-2008, Mugabe was captive to the corrupt, nondemocratic system he had built over the previous thirty years.
The second round of the 2008 elections proceeded with such pro-ruling party violence that the opposition withdrew to prevent a bloodbath.
The 2008 elections were so grossly flawed and the results so questionable that South Africa and other countries stepped in to force Mugabe into a nominal power-sharing agreement with the opposition.
Although Mugabe and his party retained control of the security services, opposition leader Tsvangirai became prime minister, several ministries went to the opposition, and Zimbabwe enjoyed three years of relative peace and economic progress.

In 2013 and 2018, the JOC coordinated more sophisticated means of fixing elections, including manipulating voter registration and the voters’ rolls.
These measures were so successful in the 2013 election that people were elected on the ruling party ticket who did not even know they were running for office.
Even die-hard ZANU-PF supporters were stunned by the 61–35 margin of their party’s victory.

In 2008, alluvial diamonds were discovered in eastern Zimbabwe, and the military moved in to "secure" this newly discovered asset.

11

Senior military commanders offered partnerships to Chinese mining companies and enjoyed enormous personal profit.
Seven years later, even Mugabe was asking why the nation had not seen any benefits from the diamond mining operations.
He needed only to look at the hotel-sized mansions his generals were building in Harare’s posh neighborhoods to begin to understand where the money had gone.

Grace Mugabe and the Fracturing Ruling Party


Many of those mansion builders were comrades in arms from Zimbabwe’s war of independence.
They, their families, and their business cronies were not eager to give up power or wealth.
They were especially disinclined to share power with those they derisively called "the salad eaters," younger Zimbabweans who had not been involved in the liberation war and had grown up in the cities eating at fancy restaurants.
Younger members of the ruling party—some technocrats and some opportunists—began to challenge the old guard.
This group of younger government officials and business people aligned itself with Grace Mugabe and became known as the "Group of 40 Year Olds," or "G40."

Grace Mugabe was widely reviled in Zimbabwe for her venality and predilection for extravagant shopping trips.
In 2003, when food insecurity brought on by a combination of "land reform" and drought threatened millions of Zimbabweans, Grace was accused of spending $120,000 on shoes and jewelry in a single shopping trip to Paris.
She was also a prime beneficiary of her husband’s "fast-track" land reform program and seized farms, businesses, and real estate for her personal benefit.
Zimbabweans began calling her "Gucci Grace" and "Dis-Grace."
The University of Zimbabwe awarded her a doctoral degree three months after she entered the program, an act of such blatant disregard for educational standards that the university’s vice chancellor was later arrested for it.

People cheer a passing Zimbabwe Defense Force military vehicle 18 November 2017 during a demonstration demanding the resignation of President Robert Mugabe in Harare.
Zimbabwe was set for more political turmoil with protests planned as veterans of the independence war, activists, and ruling party leaders called publicly for Mugabe to be forced from office.
(Photo by Belal Khaled/NurPhoto/Sipa USA via AP Images)


As Mugabe’s age (ninety-three in 2017) caught up with him and his grip on power and his senses began to decline, the rivalry between the old guard and the Grace Mugabe/G40 faction intensified.
In 2014, Grace Mugabe emerged as a serious political player, attacking then Vice President Joice Mujuru in public speeches, using vulgar language and expressions that shocked many Zimbabweans.
At the same time, Grace’s role as nurse and caretaker for her increasingly frail husband was growing.
Mugabe was becoming more prone to falling asleep in public, mumbling and stumbling, and needing more frequent trips to Singapore and Dubai for medical attention.
The old guard’s nightmare scenario was one in which Grace’s power grew in direct proportion to Mugabe’s failing health, as she became the sole gatekeeper and conveyor of his wishes, taking his political legacy and power for her own.
The intraparty fissures between the G40 and the old guard intensified and threatened those who thought they had earned the right to rule and profit from Zimbabwe because of their service in the war for independence.
Mugabe fired Mujuru in December 2014, accusing her of "factionalism."
Typical of the political balancing act Mugabe had choreographed for years, he then appointed his long-time aide, Emmerson Mnangagwa, to succeed Mujuru as vice president.
As long as neither the G40 nor the old guard had too much power and the factions balanced each other out, Mugabe was safe.
He was also trapped, though, in the finely balanced, no-clear-successor, political structure he had built.

Triggering the Coup


In early November 2017, Mugabe hinted that he might name his wife as vice president.
This strengthened the G40’s hopes of taking power and threatened the old guard and the military.
The ruling party’s youth league called for Mugabe to dismiss Mnangagwa, and Grace joined in the chorus.
Provincial ruling-party committees began to pass resolutions calling for Grace to be made vice president.

On 6 November, Mugabe dismissed Emmerson Mnangagwa as vice president, and Mnangagwa fled to Mozambique fearing for his safety.
On 12 November, then commander of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces Gen.
Constantino Chiwenga returned from an official trip to China.
The G40, working with Zimbabwe Republic Police commander Augustine Chihuri, planned to arrest Chiwenga upon his arrival at the airport in Harare.
Chiwenga, however, was tipped off, and soldiers disguised as baggage handlers overpowered the police and prevented Chiwenga’s arrest.
On 13 November, Chiwenga released a statement warning that the "purging" of ZANU-PF officials must stop.

12

In response, a party spokesman accused Chiwenga of "treasonable actions."

13

That was it.

President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Emmerson Mnangagwa, on 15 January 2019.
Mnangagwa assumed the office of president in November 2017 after the resignation of Robert Mugabe.
(Photo courtesy of kremlin.ru via Wikimedia Commons)


On 14 November, there were reports of unusual movement of military vehicles on the northwestern approaches to Harare.
That night, military forces took control of state television and radio and placed Robert and Grace Mugabe under house arrest at their residence.
Security forces arrested or pursued a number of G40-aligned government officials.
Some gunfire was heard in the city, and a few G40 officials sought refuge or went into hiding.

On 15 November, Maj.
Gen.
Sibusiso Moyo spoke to the people of Zimbabwe via state television and radio.
He denied that there had been a coup and said that the military was "only targeting criminals around [Mugabe] who are committing crimes … that are causing social and economic suffering in the country."
Moyo sought to reassure the country that Mugabe and his family were "safe and sound."
Moyo went on to say, "As soon as we have accomplished our mission, we expect that the situation will return to normalcy."

14


Over the next six days, Zimbabweans lived in suspense, as negotiations took place among the military, Robert Mugabe, and South African facilitators.
On 17 November, Mugabe was allowed out of his home to preside over a graduation ceremony at a local university.
On 18 November, thousands of Zimbabweans took to the streets in peaceful demonstrations calling for Mugabe’s resignation.
On 19 November, ZANU-PF dismissed Mugabe as its leader, but he was allowed to deliver a televised speech in which he was expected to announce his resignation as president of Zimbabwe.
Much to the obvious consternation of the military officers sitting with him during the speech, he did not resign.

15

On 20 November, the Zimbabwean parliament voted to begin impeachment proceedings against Mugabe on charges of "allowing his wife to usurp constitutional power."

16

On 21 November, as impeachment proceedings were underway and with the prospect of a Gaddhafi-like demise becoming more real, Mugabe formally resigned.
When the speaker of the parliament read Mugabe’s resignation letter to parliament, members of both the opposition and ruling parties began to cheer, ululate, and dance.

When the speaker of the parliament read Mugabe’s resignation letter to parliament, members of both the opposition and ruling parties began to cheer, ululate, and dance.


Emmerson Mnangagwa returned to Zimbabwe on 22 November and was sworn in as president on 24 November.
In his inaugural address and in the months that followed, Mnangagwa proffered a welcome change of rhetoric from his predecessor.
He acknowledged the mistakes of previous economic and land reform programs and pledged to correct them.
He spoke of his determination to fight corruption, create jobs, and improve relations with the IFIs and the West.
Zimbabwean business people believed Mnangagwa was pragmatic about business and investment, and he would make good economic decisions.
Civil society and media leaders perceived a greater tolerance for criticism of the government than had been the case under Mugabe.
In the first weeks of the "new dispensation," as Zimbabwean politicians called the Mnangagwa government, things were looking up.

As Mnangagwa assembled his cabinet, there was hope he would reach across the aisle and appoint some members of the opposition.
That did not happen.
Instead, Mnangagwa’s cabinet was heavy on career military officers who traded in their epaulets for pinstripes, confirming for all that this was nothing less than a coup.

Chiwenga, who on 13 November had warned against purging ZANU-PF officials, became one of Mnangagwa’s two vice presidents and remained head of the Joint Operations Command.
Lt. Gen.
Moyo, who had taken to the airwaves on 15 November to reassure Zimbabweans that no coup was underway, became minister of foreign affairs and international trade.
Air Marshal Perence Shiri, former commander of the North Korean-trained Fifth Brigade, became minister of lands, agriculture and rural resettlement.
Lt. Gen.
Engelbert Rugeje became the national political commissar for the ruling ZANU-PF party.

Each of these career military officers nominally retired before assuming their new civilian positions, but their presence in such senior positions gives rise to serious questions about who is really in charge in Zimbabwe.
More than once, Chiwenga has appeared to contradict or ignore a statement or policy position from Mnangagwa.
Two months before the 2018 election, the deputy minister of finance said what everyone was thinking, that there was no way the military would allow the opposition to win.
Terrence Mukupe said to supporters, "How can we say, honestly, the soldiers took the country, practically snatched it from Mugabe, to come and hand it over to [opposition leader] Chamisa?"

17


Still, the general impression among common Zimbabweans was that Mnangagwa brought improvement, and more importantly, Mugabe was out.
The opposition was allowed to campaign in rural areas that had been off limits to them for years.
People were less fearful of speaking critically of the government in public places.
International media, long denied visas to report from Zimbabwe, were able to operate openly and file stories.
Incidents of political violence declined.
Mnangagwa invited international observers from Europe and the United States to observe the 2018 elections, and his government appeared interested in seeking to rejoin the Commonwealth.
Perhaps most important to ordinary Zimbabweans, the predatory actions of the Zimbabwean police—seeking bribes at road checkpoints every few kilometers—stopped.

Inside government, no one spoke of a coup.
Rather, the events of November 2017 were called a "military assisted transition."
Outside of government, it was called a coup or, with Zimbabwe’s typically wry sense of humor, the "coup that wasn’t a coup" or the "not-a-coup coup."
It was, of course, a coup, albeit one that had been informally endorsed by a jubilant public, officially endorsed by Zimbabwe’s High Court, and tacitly endorsed by neighboring states, the Africa Union, and all of the nations that sent election observers to the July 2018 elections, including the United States.

Inside government, no one spoke of a coup.
Rather, the events of November 2017 were called a ‘military assisted transition.’


2018 Elections Fall Short


What President Mnangagwa and Zimbabwe needed to fully quell the coup/no coup debate, or show that a coup could be a good thing, was a peaceful, transparent, and credible election.
Only through such an election—scheduled for 31 July 2018—could Mnangagwa’s government be certified as legitimate.
That legitimacy was needed to restore confidence in Zimbabwe; resolve differences with former allies such as the United Kingdom, the European Union, and the United States; rebuild relations with the IFIs; and attract new investment.
While Mnangagwa’s rhetoric on issues such as land reform, human rights, rule of law, improving the business climate, and reducing corruption was all positive, there was little actual action behind the words.
Some Zimbabweans argued that Mnangagwa was still beholden to the military leaders who put him in power and could not afford to undertake serious reforms until he had an electoral mandate.
So, a credible election was vital not just to Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community but for Mnangagwa’s hold on power as well.

It became clear to most observers in the months leading up to the election that the process was unlikely to deliver the credibility and legitimacy the government needed.
Registration of voters appeared skewed to the advantage of traditional ZANU-PF supporters in rural areas and against young urban voters more likely to support the opposition.
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) did not appear to be independent of the government and declined to be any more transparent than strictly demanded by the law.
Procurement and printing of ballots—a sensitive topic in Zimbabwe—was undertaken in secrecy, and the final ballot did not adhere to Zimbabwe’s own standards.
While the opposition did have more freedom to campaign than they had in previous elections, their access to state media was limited in violation of Zimbabwe’s electoral law.
The military steadfastly declined to state publicly that they would respect the outcome of the election, even if the opposition won.
Given the Zimbabwean military command’s history of saying they would never salute an opposition government, and their role in political violence in previous elections, their refusal to state that they would accept the will of the people had a chilling effect on the process.

July 31, Election Day, was orderly and peaceful.
On 1 August, the ZEC released preliminary results indicating that ZANU-PF had won a majority of seats in parliament.
Opposition supporters protested what they believed was a rigged outcome and clashed with military forces in downtown Harare.
Six protestors were killed in the confrontation.
(In November 2018, a government-appointed commission of inquiry completed its investigation of the 1 August conflict and submitted its report to Mnangagwa.
As of 5 December, the report had not been made public.)
On 3 August, the ZEC declared Emmerson Mnangagwa the winner with 50.8 percent of the vote to opposition leader Nelson Chamisa’s 44.3 percent.
These results are in line with public opinion research conducted by Afrobarometer in June and July 2018, so they may well be a legitimate result.
Unfortunately, Zimbabwe’s history of rigged and violent electoral processes, the ZEC’s lack of transparency, the government’s inability to follow its own electoral laws, and the military’s unwillingness to pledge support for the people’s will left the 2018 election short of the credibility needed to rehabilitate the government’s legitimacy.
The process was an improvement over 2013, and a great improvement over 2008 and 2002, but enough questions remained to undermine confidence in government.

The New Dispensation


If Zimbabwe proves true to form, the country will settle into an uneasy political peace as common Zimbabweans struggle to make ends meet in a continually declining economy.
Mnangagwa will remain president for at least five years.
The ruling party has already announced that Mnangagwa will be their candidate in 2023, so he could be president through 2028, at which point he will be eighty-six years old.

While Mugabe has left the political scene, he and Grace continue to live in peace in Zimbabwe, much as his predecessor Ian Smith did for more than twenty years after majority rule came in 1980.
But other than a different president, Zimbabwe has not changed much.
As the events January 2019 have shown—the grossly disproportionate use of police and military force to stop protests and looting—Zimbabwe’s government/ruling party remains willing to do whatever it takes to remain in power.
Credible reporting by independent media and NGOs indicate twelve to eighteen citizens killed, scores wounded, and hundreds arrested in a three-week long government crackdown against protestors and members of the MDC opposition party.
Most disturbingly, there are credible reports of security forces raping women to suppress protests.

18

Tragically, this government/ruling party use of violence against its own citizens looks just like what the Mugabe-led government/ruling party did in the mid-1980s and the early 2000s.

Zimbabweans celebrate 18 November 2017 after President Robert Mugabe resigned in Harare, Zimbabwe.
(Photo by Philimon Bulawayo, Reuters)


While there has been some new openness in political dialogue and more freedom for dissent, the state still controls radio and television, and it shut down the internet for several days during the January 2019 protests.
While the government’s talking points on fundamental issues such as rule of law, debt, and international cooperation are more rational, measurable reform is elusive.
Shona-speaking political, business, and military elite continue to call the shots and live in luxury while the middle class emigrates and the poor suffer on.
The government’s economic managers continue to look for short-term responses to systemic problems, print fake money, and extract hard currency from any place they can find it.
The military remains the strongest, most capable institution in the country, and the High Court’s blessing of the November 2017 coup keeps the threat of another coup alive.
The executive branch of government has subordinated the judiciary and completely overshadows the parliament.
Bankable title to agricultural land remains only a promise, so there is no collateral for new investment that could revive commercial agriculture and Zimbabwe’s economy.
Mining continues to generate some export earnings, but disputes with Chinese and Russian mining companies have hurt those ventures, and Western companies see more secure opportunities in neighboring countries.
Much of the popular gratitude for the military’s removal of Mugabe evaporated on 1 August 2018 when soldiers shot and killed six protesters.

19

Public support for Mnangagwa and hope for reform is being trampled out of existence by the brutal actions of security forces in January 2019.
Hopes that the coup of November 2017 opened a new beginning for Zimbabwe have proven false.

Are All Coups Bad?


According to data collected by University of Kentucky political scientists Jonathan Powell and Clayton Thyne, there were about 450 coups worldwide between 1950 and 2010.

20

Most, like Zimbabwe’s, effected little change in a country’s underlying problems of poor governance, corruption, weak rule of law, and bad economic policy.
The authors found that "coups promote democratization, particularly among states that are least likely to democratize otherwise."

21

However, looking at a list of current African leaders who have come to power via a coup, it is hard to see much promotion of democracy.
That list includes Obiang in Equatorial Guinea, Museveni in Uganda, Guelleh in Djibouti, Sassou Nguesso in the Republic of Congo, Abdel Aziz in Mauritania, Bashir in Sudan, and Deby in Chad.
It’s not easy to see the democratizing impulse in any of these leaders.

Still, law professor Ozan Varol, author of

The Democratic Coup d’État

, argues that a military coup can sometimes establish a democracy.
Varol lays out the following criteria for judging whether a coup is "democratic":


the coup is staged against an authoritarian or totalitarian regime,


the military responds to persistent popular opposition against that regime,


the authoritarian or totalitarian regime refuses to step down in response to the popular uprising,


the coup is staged by a military that is highly respected within the nation, ordinarily because of mandatory conscription,


the military stages the coup to overthrow the authoritarian or totalitarian regime,


the military facilitates free and fair elections within a short span of time, and


the coup ends with the transfer of power to democratically elected leaders.

22



Varol acknowledges that the vast majority of military coups are undemocratic in nature, and evaluated by his criteria, Zimbabwe’s November 2017 coup is one of that majority.

Exceptions may illustrate the rule.
Portugal’s 1974 coup, Turkey’s coup in 1960 and, perhaps, Ghana’s coup in 1979 each seem to have led to stronger democracies.
Ghana’s was an incremental process, and Turkey is backsliding today, but Portugal remains an example of a coup that delivered democracy.
However, three positive examples out of more than 450 coups or attempted coups is poor evidence of the efficacy of coups in advancing democratic governance.

As in Zimbabwe, coups generally leave the judiciary alone in exchange for some sort of court ruling that legitimizes the military’s undemocratic action.
And therein lies the greatest problem for coups.
Once the courts legitimize a coup—an unconstitutional transfer of power—the bar is set lower and it sets a precedent for future coups.
The one thing that coups seem to do consistently is increase the likelihood of subsequent coups.

If Zimbabwe’s parliament had acted to impeach Robert Mugabe on their own accord, rather than waiting for the military to act first, Zimbabwe’s chances for lasting, fundamental reform would be better than they are today.
The immediate result, a Mnangagwa presidency, would likely have been the same.
But, the parliament would be seen as a more potent branch of government, the judiciary would be less compromised, and the military could maintain the facade of being apolitical.
These factors would have contributed to Zimbabwean and international confidence in the country’s commitment to the rule of law and democratic process.
The climb back to respectability would have been a little less steep, and the odds of another nondemocratic transfer of power a little less likely.

Zimbabweans remain a remarkable people, capable of finding solutions to problems that would overwhelm others, and they deserve the chance to overcome their current challenges.
Until recent unrest in response to the rise in petroleum prices and high inflation, most Zimbabweans still hoped for reform of the country’s governance and economic systems, and some were still willing to give Emmerson Mnangagwa time to show that he is the reformer he has promised to be.
However, recent splits within ZANU-PF and clear lack of control of the military by Mnangagwa, who responded to demonstrations with the live-fire killings of at least twelve and injuring of hundreds, including sixty-eight people wounded by gunfire, show that the marriage of convenience between Mnangagwa and the military is unraveling.
Signs that Mnangagwa and his government understood the expectations their citizens have of them were optimistic at best.
Early euphoria has translated to high levels of frustration by a disaffected and marginalized youth population affected by high unemployment, shortages of major staples, and scarcity of foreign currency.
Hopes that Zimbabwe, through Mnangagwa, would be one of those rare examples of a military coup that restores democracy are slowly and methodically being dashed by a military not willing to allow change.

Notes



"Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe Resigns, Ending 37-Year Rule," BBC News, 21 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-42071488.


Austin Koltonowski, "Zimbabwe High Court Rules Military Intervention Constitutional," Jurist, 27 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.jurist.org/news/2017/11/zimbabwe-high-court-rules-military-intervention-constitutional/.


Jackie Cameron, "Zimbabwe MDC Founder David Coltart: Too Early to Celebrate, Military Must Return to Barracks," BizNews, 20 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.biznews.com/global-citizen/2017/11/20/zimbabwe-mdc-david-coltart.


David Coltart, "Op-Ed: Zimbabwe Faces a Grave Constitutional Crisis," Daily Maverick, 16 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2017-11-16-op-ed-zimbabwe-faces-a-grave-constitutional-crisis/.


Associated Press, Zimbabwe Judge Says Military Action against Mugabe Was Legal," CBC News, 25 November 2017, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.cbc.ca/news/world/zimbabwe-mugabe-military-action-ruled-legal-1.4419641.


Johnnie Carson, discussions with D.
Bruce Wharton, July 2012 and January 2019.


"President Mugabe’s 1980 Independence Speech," Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation, 10 April 2012, accessed 23 January 2019, http://www.zbc.co.zw/president-mugabes-1980-independence-speech/.


"Zimbabwe," The World Bank, accessed 23 January 2019, https://data.worldbank.org/country/zimbabwe.


Wilson Johwa, Zimbabwe’s Secret War in the DRC,"

Mail Guardian

(website), 11 September 2004, accessed 23 January 2019, https://mg.co.za/article/2004-09-11-zimbabwes-secret-war-in-the-drc.


The phrase "from breadbasket to basket case," used to describe Zimbabwe’s downfall under the Mugabe regime, appears in numerous articles.
See for example, "From Breadbasket to Basket Case: Faced with Famine, Robert Mugabe Orders Farmers to Stop Growing Food,"

The Economist

(website), 27 June 2002, accessed 23 January 2019, https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2002/06/27/from-breadbasket-to-basket-case.


David Towriss, "Buying Loyalty: Zimbabwe’s Marange Diamonds,"

Journal of Southern African Studies

39, no.
1 (21 March 2013): 99–117, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263377948_Buying_Loyalty_Zimbabwe’s_Marange_Diamonds.


"Zimbabwe Military Chief Chiwenga in ZANU-PF Purge Warning," BBC News, 13 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-41970317.


"Zimbabwe: Army Chief Accused of ‘Treasonable Conduct,’" BBC News, 14 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-41991425.


Bill Chappell, "Zimbabwe’s Mugabe Out of Power for First Time since 1980s as Military Takes Control," NPR, 15 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/11/15/564320495/zimbabwes-mugabe-is-out-of-power-for-first-time-since-1980s-military-denies-coup.


David McKenzie et al., "Zimbabwe’s Mugabe Vows to Stay in Power Despite Pressure to Resign," CNN, 19 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/19/africa/zimbabwe-mugabe-party-meeting/index.html.


"Zimbabwe Latest: Mugabe ‘Let Wife Grace Usurp Power,’" BBC News, 20 November 2017, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-42055726.


"‘MDC Will Never Rule Zimbabwe,’ Says Controversial Mnangagwa Aide," News24, 31 May 2018, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.news24.com/Africa/Zimbabwe/mdc-will-never-rule-zimbabwe-says-controversial-mnangagwa-minister-20180531.


"Zimbabwe Women Urged to Report Rape by Soldiers," BBC News, 29 January 2019, accessed 4 February 2019, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-47042101.


Farai Mutsaka, "Zimbabwe Inquiry Finds Army, Police Killed 6 during Protest," Associated Press, 18 December 2018, accessed 24 January 2019, https://www.apnews.com/da834ecd975b4cd3941c06596a42e835.


Clayton L. Thyne and Jonathan M.
Powell, "Coup d’État or Coup d’Autocracy?
How Coups Impact Democratization, 1950–2008,"

Foreign Policy Analysis

12, no.
2 (1 April 2016): 192–213, https://academic.oup.com/fpa/article-abstract/12/2/192/2367607?redirectedFrom=fulltext [requires an Oxford Academic account].


Ibid.


Ozan Varol,

The Democratic Coup d’Etat

(New York: Oxford University Press, 2017).



Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield retired from the Senior Foreign Service of the United States in 2017 after thirty-five years of service.
She is a senior counselor at Albright Stonebridge Group in their Africa practice and a Distinguished Fellow of African Studies at Georgetown University.
She was assistant secretary for African affairs from 2013 to 2017 and director general of the Foreign Service and director of personnel from 2012 to 2013.
Thomas-Greenfield was ambassador to Liberia from 2008 to 2012

Ambassador D.
Bruce Wharton, a retired member of the Senior Foreign Service of the United States, served as the U.S. ambassador to Zimbabwe from 2012 to 2015, and principal deputy secretary of state for African affairs from 2015 to 2016.
He also served as the public affairs officer at the U.S. embassy in Zimbabwe from 1999 to 2003.

Back to Top



####
document number 3: 
Morocco Warns Of Growing Terrorist Threat In Mali


The U.N. Security Council is expected to take action soon to approve an African military intervention force for Mali.
Morocco is nervous about the al-Qaida affiliate based in Northern Mali, a group that is now training and supporting extremists across the continent.
That's a fear the head of U.S. Africa Command is also raising.
But both he and officials in Morocco say there needs to be a two-tracked approach — a military intervention to root out al-Qaida and a big diplomatic push to reunite Mali.
A coup led to a power vacuum with al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb now controlling the north.

AUDIE CORNISH, HOST:

From NPR News, this is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED.
I'm Audie Cornish.

MELISSA BLOCK, HOST:

And I'm Melissa Block.

The African nation of Mali is one of the many pressing topics facing the U.N. Security Council this month.
After a coup in Mali back in March, an al-Qaida affiliate seized control of the northern part of the country, and the terrorist threat there is growing.
As NPR's Michele Kelemen reports, U.S. officials aren't the only ones raising alarms.

MICHELE KELEMEN, BYLINE: A top Moroccan official was making the rounds in Washington this week, warning of a growing extremist threat in Africa from the Gulf of Guinea to the Gulf of Yemen.
Speaking in between meetings, the minister delegate for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation Youssef Amrani says the international community needs to do something and fast about northern Mali, which has become a safe haven for al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

YOUSSEF AMRANI: It's urgent because if we don't find appropriate solutions, the situation will get worse.
This will reinforce the extremist movement who are working today for the instability for the whole region.

KELEMEN: Morocco is the current president of the U.N. Security Council, and Amrani says his country will make sure that the council passes a resolution to authorize an African intervention force for Mali.

AMRANI: We need people who knows the region and the country.
And Africans have taken the lead.
That's good.

KELEMEN: But the Africans have offered just 3,000 troops to battle extremists in a region the size of Texas.
And that's just not enough, says J.
Peter Pham of the Atlantic Council, who points out that even the U.N. secretary general isn't ready to put U.N. funds behind that African plan.

J.
PETER PHAM: It's like a child who keeps turning in the same piece of homework over and over and over trying to wear the teacher down into accepting it.
I don't think that's a helpful strategy.
I think the Security Council really has to take the leadership role here.

KELEMEN: Pham says it will take several more months to get a force trained, funded, and ready to intervene.
The top U.S. military commander for Africa, General Carter Ham, was asked at George Washington University this week whether that's too late.

GENERAL CARTER HAM: As each day goes by, al-Qaida and other organizations are strengthening their hold in northern Mali.

KELEMEN: Ham says there's evidence that extremists from other countries, including Nigeria, have gone to northern Mali for training.
And the AFRICOM commander says al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb is one of the best-funded and well-armed al-Qaida affiliates these days.
But he cautions against premature military action, saying the real challenge is countering al-Qaida's ideology.

HAM: The military is a - an essential but non-decisive component of countering that ideology.
It will be more successful when there's good governance, when there's economic development, when there's medical care, when there's hope and opportunity for people so that they foresee a better future and are not susceptible to a more extremist ideology which presently seems to be gaining traction.

KELEMEN: On Mali, diplomats are trying to help reunite the country.
The Moroccan foreign ministry official, Amrani, says the goal is to reach out to indigenous Tuareg rebels in the north to peel them away from al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb.

AMRANI: If they agree to play the game, if I may say so, that will be a good opportunity to help the Malians to reinforce their national cohesion.

KELEMEN: But for negotiations to succeed there also needs to be a legitimate government in Mali.
And that hasn't been the case since a coup earlier this year, says Pham of the Atlantic Council.

PHAM: One of the reasons for the Tuareg uprising in northern Mali was previous peace deals were broken.
If the Tuaregs had grievances about broken deals with legitimate governments, why would they ever sign a deal with a government that's not supported?

KELEMEN: That's one more problem for the countries in the region and the international community to help solve to try to prevent al-Qaida from digging themselves in.
Michele Kelemen, NPR News, Washington.

Copyright © 2012 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.


By subscribing, you agree to NPR's terms of use and privacy policy.
NPR may share your name and email address with your NPR station.
See Details.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.



####
document number 4: 
Timeline: Political crisis in Ukraine and Russia's occupation of Crimea


KIEV (Reuters) - Here is a timeline of the fall of Ukraine’s government and Russia’s subsequent incursion into Ukraine’s Crimea region.


Ukrainian navy ships are docked at the Crimean port of Yevpatorya March 8, 2014.
REUTERS/David Mdzinarishvili


The crisis began in November when Ukraine’s then president, Viktor Yanukovich, under Russian pressure, turned his back on a trade deal with the EU and accepted a $15 billion bailout from Moscow.
That prompted three months of street protests, leading to the overthrow of Yanukovich on February 22.

Moscow denounced the events as an illegitimate coup and refused to recognize the new Ukrainian authorities.
In late February, Russian troops seized the Crimean peninsula in a bloodless military takeover.

* Nov 21: Kiev suddenly announces suspension of trade and association talks with the EU and opts to revive economic ties with Moscow.

Several hundred Ukrainians gather on the capital’s central Independence Square to protest.

* Nov 22: Jailed opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko urges Ukrainians to protest against the switch away from the EU.

* Nov 24: Some 100,000 people rally in Kiev against spurning the EU.

* Nov 25: Ukrainian police fire tear gas at demonstrators.

* Nov 29: At the EU summit in the Lithuanian capital Vilnius, Yanukovich fails to sign the association agreement.

* Nov 30: Riot police try to break up the Kiev demonstration by force.
Protest turns against Yanukovich and his government.

* Dec 1: Some 350,000 people protest in Kiev and clash with police.
Crowds turn Independence Square into a protest tent city.
Opposition leaders call on Yanukovich to resign.

* Dec 4: Senior EU officials and ministers start visiting the protest square.

* Dec 6: Yanukovich holds previously unannounced talks in Sochi with Putin on "strategic partnership".

* Dec 8: Some 800,000 people rally in Kiev.
A statue of Lenin is toppled.

* Dec 13: Yanukovich’s first face-to-face talks with opposition bring no breakthrough in crisis.

* Dec 15: EU suspends talks with Ukraine on the pact.
Some 200,000 people rally in Kiev.

* Dec 17: Yanukovich and Putin meet for second time since crisis began.
Putin agrees to buy $15 billion of Ukrainian debt and to slash by a third the price of Russian gas supplies to Ukraine.

* Dec 18: Tens of thousands of protesters gather in Kiev, calling for Yanukovich to resign over bailout.

* Dec 20: About 100,000 take to square in central Kiev, opposition forms bloc called Maidan.

Dec 24: Ukraine receives first $3 billion tranche of Russian bailout.

* Jan 12: At least 50,000 protesters march in Kiev, reviving the movement after a Christmas and New Year lull.

* Jan 15: Ukraine court bans protests in central Kiev.

* Jan 17: Yanukovich signs new laws banning anti-government protests.

* Jan 19: Thousands protest in Kiev defying ban, some clashing with riot police.

* Jan 22: Three people die during protests and EU threatens action over handling of crisis.
Talks between opposition and Yanukovich fail.

* Jan 23: Washington threatens sanctions if violence continues.

* Jan 26: Police clash with protesters in Kiev.
Unrest spreads to traditionally pro-Yanukovich east.
Yanukovich offers important government posts to opposition, who say they will press for more concessions, including early elections.

* Jan 27: Yanukovich and opposition agree to scrap some of the anti-protest laws.
Protesters try to storm Kiev cultural centre.

* Jan 28: Ukrainian Prime Minister Mykola Azarov resigns.
Deputies loyal to Yanukovich overturn anti-protest laws in a bid to restore calm.

* Jan 30: Yanukovich goes on sick leave, announcing that he is suffering from an acute respiratory ailment.

* Jan 31: Still on sick leave, Yanukovich signs into law a conditional amnesty for those detained in the unrest.

* Feb 2: Yanukovich returns to work after four days’ sick leave, protesters fill Kiev’s main square.

* Feb 7: Moscow accuses the United States of trying to foment a coup in Ukraine.
Washington says Russia leaked a recording of U.S. diplomats discussing how to shape a new government in Kiev.

* Feb 9: Pressure on Yanukovich grows as protests against him continue and Russia links disbursement of next tranche of a $15 billion aid package to repayment of hefty gas bill.

* Feb 14: Russia accuses EU of seeking Ukraine "sphere of influence".
Protesters released under amnesty but streets still tense.

* Feb 17: Russia boosts Yanukovich with $2 billion fresh cash injection to Ukraine.

* Feb 18: At least 14 people die as protesters clash with police in worst violence since demonstrations began.

* Feb 19: West threatens sanctions after death toll rises to 26.
Yanukovich denounces bloodshed as an attempted coup.

* Feb 20: At least 39 die in clashes in Kiev.
Foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland meet with Yanukovich, extend stay to put a political roadmap to opposition leaders.

* Feb 21: Opposition leaders sign EU-mediated peace pact Yanukovich to end violence that killed at least 77 people.

* Feb 22: Ukraine’s parliament votes to remove Yanukovich, who flees his Kiev office, denouncing what he says is a coup.
His arch-rival Yulia Tymoshenko is released from jail.

* Feb 24: Fugitive Yanukovich indicted for "mass murder" over demonstrator deaths.
Moscow says it will not deal with leaders of "armed mutiny" against Yanukovich.

* Feb 26: Ukraine names ministers for new government.
Angry Russia puts 150,000 troops on high alert.
Washington warns Moscow against military intervention.

* Feb 27: Armed men seize Crimea parliament, raise Russian flag.
Kiev’s new rulers warn Moscow to keep troops within its naval base on the peninsula.
Hryvnia falls to record low.

* Feb 28: Armed men take control of two airports in Crimea, described by Ukrainian minister as invasion by Moscow’s forces.
Ousted Yanukovich surfaces in Russia after a week on the run.

* March 1: Putin wins parliamentary approval to invade Ukraine.
In Kiev, new government warns of war, puts troops on high alert and appeals to NATO for help.
White House warns Russia of economic, political isolation.
Russian forces fan out in Crimea.
Pro-Moscow demonstrations erupt across Ukraine’s south and east in what Kiev calls an attempt to repeat Crimea scenario.

* March 2: Russian forces tighten grip on Crimea.
Ukraine announces call-up of reserves.
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry condemns Russia for "incredible act of aggression", threatening "very serious repercussions".

* March 3: Markets open for first time since Kremlin announcement of right to invade.
Russian share prices and ruble plummet.

* March 4: Putin announces end to war games in Western Russia, orders troops near frontier back to barracks.
Ukraine says Russian navy has blocked strait between Crimea and Russia.
Putin says military force in Ukraine would only be "last resort".
Kerry in Kiev.
U.S. official says Washington working on sanctions against Russia.

* March 5: Russia rebuffs calls to withdraw troops from Crimea, saying "self-defense" forces are not under its command.
European Union pledges 11 billion euros in aid to Kiev.

* March 6: Crimea’s pro-Russian leadership votes to join Russia and sets referendum for March 16, escalating crisis.
U.S. President Barack Obama says referendum would violate international law and orders sanctions on those responsible for Moscow’s military intervention in Ukraine.

EU leaders hold an emergency summit to try to find ways to pressure Russia to back down and accept mediation.
Military monitors from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe barred from entering Crimea.

* March 7: After hour-long phone call with Obama, Putin says they are still far apart.

* March 8: Warning shots are fired to prevent an unarmed international military observer mission from entering Crimea.
Russian forces become increasingly aggressive towards Ukrainian troops trapped in bases.



####
document number 5: 
Chief Justice Adly Mansour replaces Morsi, sworn in as Egypt’s interim president


July 04, AP – The head of Egypt’s Supreme Constitutional Court has been sworn in as the interim president after the army ousted President Mohammed Morsi Wednesday night.
The military also suspended the Islamist-drafted constitution.


Adly Mansour, the head of the country’s Supreme Constitutional Court, has been sworn in Thursday as Egypt’s temporary head of state after the military ousted President Mohammed Morsi.

In his first remarks, Mansour praised the massive street demonstrations, that began on June 30, that led to Morsi’s ouster.
He also hailed the youth behind the protests saying they embodied "the nation’s conscience, its ambitions and hopes."

"The most glorious thing about June 30 is that it brought together everyone without discrimination or division," he said.
"I offer my greetings to the revolutionary people of Egypt."

After a 48-hour deadline for Morsi to reach a compromise deal with the opposition was met with no action by the president, the Egyptian army began its intervention solution Wednesday night.

Armed Forces Commander in Chief Abdel-Fattah al-Sissi said on national television that Mansour, would act as interim president and pledged the creation of a national unity government to serve until fresh elections could take place.
He said a "strong and capable" government would be formed that would have "full capacities."

Al-Sissi also announced the formation of a panel that would look into amendments to the constitution and a law would be drafted to regulate parliamentary elections.
The current constitution – drafted in a committee dominated by Morsi’s Islamist allies – had been suspended, he said.

Following the news, Cairo’s Tahrir Square, the centerpoint of the public protests opposing Morsi, erupted in celebration with people letting off fireworks, singing and cheering in the streets.

Muslim Brotherhood spokesman Gehad El-Haddad wrote on his Twitter feed that Morsi was placed under house arrest at the headquarters of the Republican Guard along with several other Brotherhood members.
He later said Morsi had been separated and taken to the defense ministry.

A revolution reignited

A statement on the Egyptian president’s office’s Twitter account quoted Morsi as saying that the actions of the military amounted to "a full coup."
Morsi narrowly won a presidential runoff election last June, claiming 51.7 percent of the vote and becoming Egypt’s first democratically elected president.

However, Egypt’s largely state-run press unanimously dubbed the army’s overthrow as a "legitimate" revolution.

"The people’s legitimacy was victorious," the government-owned Al-Gomhuriya said on its front page.

The headline in government-owned newspaper, Al-Ahram, read, "President ousted by revolutionary legitimacy."

State-owned Al-Akhbar said, "And the people’s revolution was victorious."

Violence was reported in several cities across Egypt overnight.
State-run newspaper Al-Ahram reported eight deaths and 343 injuries.
The Brotherhood’s El-Haddad also said on Twitter that men in plain clothes had opened fire on a group of Morsi supporters protesting against the military intervention.

Associated press journalist for human rights observers – Khizer hayat, reports from the region.

Tags: chief justice adly mansour interim president of egypt, egyptian army suspends constitution, facebook hromedia post adly mansour chief justice of supreme court takes oath as interim president, featured, hro, human rights, human rights magazine news human rights, human rights news morsi under house arrest, human rights news update adly mansour becomes interim president of egypt, human rights news update morsi under house arrest.
morsi detained adly mansour becomes interim president of egypt hromedia, interim president of egypt adly mansour, justice mansour interim presidentof egypt human rights observers, magazine, magazine human rights morsi under house arrest, magazine human rights observers adly mansour interim president of egypt, magazine news adly mansour of supreme court sworn in, news magazine egypt crisis adly mansour takes oath www.hromedia.com, observers, observers news adly mansour sworn in, observers news adly mansour takes oath, the magazine new adly mansour takes oath as interim president, the observer news morsi out adly mansour in as interim president, www.facebook.com/hromedia chief justce mansour sworn in as interim president of egypt



####
document number 6: 
The 1989 Invasion of Panama


Urban combat in Panama, 1989.


On December 20th, 1989, President Bush launched a military operation code-named "Operation Just Cause" to topple the dictatorial government of Manuel Noriega in Panama.
The invasion involved about 24,000 US troops who had orders to oust the leader and execute a warrant for his arrest on drug trafficking charges.
The US forces had the backing of well-equipped military hardware.
The military campaign was rather short as it lasted for only two months, beginning on December 20, 1989 and ended on January 31, 1990.

5.
Background


In the 1980s, Panama was a country of great significance to the US mainly due to the presence of the Panama Canal, a critical shipping route for American ships.
The Panama Canal, which had been constructed primarily by the US government, was partially under the control of the Panama government with a plan for it to be fully handed over to the Latin American country by the year 2000.
The small nation also hosted several US military bases which were strategic during the America-Russia Cold War because of Panama's relative proximity to Cuba.
The country’s president at the time was Manuel Noriega who had notably previously served as a paid informant for the Central Intelligence Agency and was of great help in the international war on the drug trade.
Noriega had facilitated the movement of weapons into Latin America in an effort to arm pro-western forces in the time of the Cold War.
George H. W. Bush has been at the head of CIA from 1976 – 1977.
Noriega had sided with the US and not the Soviet Union in Latin America.
He received more than $100,000 annually from the 1960s up to 1980s, when it was increased to $20,000.

Noriega worked closely with the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) to curb the illegal drug shipments.
On the other hand, he also received financial support from drug dealers and facilitated laundering drug money, because he had a special relationship with the CIA and could not be investigated by DEA.
In the 1980s, the relationship between Noriega and the US was deteriorating.
In 1986, Ronald Reagan opened negotiations urging Noriega to step down as he had been exposed publicly by the New York Times for his involvement with the illicit drug trade.
Noriega was pressured and indicted on several drug-related charges in US courts.
In 1988, a US invasion was planned, but President Reagan refused because the ties Noriega had with Bush as head of CIA, which could potentially affect Bush’s presidential campaign.
In later negotiations, the charges of drug trafficking were dropped.
In March 1988, Noriega’s forces resisted the coup attempt to topple the Panamanian government.
As the relations deteriorated further, Noriega shifted allegiance to the Soviet bloc where he received military aid from Libya, Nicaragua, and Cuba.
The US military planners started preparing plans to invade Panama.
In May 1989, Panama conducted its general elections where Noriega’s primary opponents gained majority votes only to have the government reject the results and cling to power.
Then on December 16, 1989 a convoy of US military personnel was attacked in the nation’s capital prompting President Bush to order the commencing of Operation Just Cause.

4.
Makeup


The US military was deployed to the tiny country and comprised of units from the US Army, US Air Force, The US Navy, and The US Marines.
The Panamanian Defense Forces had only 16,000 officers.
The operation involved 27,684 US troops and more than 300 aircraft, which included the C-130 Hercules tactical which was equipped with Adverse Weather Aerial Delivery System (AWADS), AC-130 Spectre gunship, C-141 Starlifter, OA-37B dragonfly observation and attack aircraft, C-5 Galaxy strategic transport, AH-64 Apache attack helicopter, and other specialized military aircraft.
Air logistics was given by the 22nd Air Force and air assistance from the 60th, 62nd, and 63rd military airlift wings.
The Panama incursion was the first combat for the AH-64 and the F-117.

3.
Description


The US military invasion began on 20th, December 1989 at 1:00 am local time.
The first course of action was to destroy all strategic installations including the Punta Paitilla Airport, Army garrisons and jamming the Panamanian radar units using EF-111As of 266th TFW and 390th ECS.
Several air assaults were critical in the capture of significant towns and cities with the deployment of paratroopers.
There were some scattered from Panamanian Defense Force (PDF).
By December 24, the PDCF had been crushed, and the US forces held most of the country.
With defeat being evident, President Noriega sought refuge in a Vatican diplomatic mission in the capital city.
However, the US forces used psychological strategies to flush him out and capture him by playing loud rock music at the diplomatic residence.
Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990 when he was captured and then flown to the US.

2.
Outcome


The war had a duration of two months and resulted in many casualties with some organizations reporting deaths of over 3,000 Panamanian civilians.
Both warring sides lost military officers with the US reporting 23 deaths from its forces and three civilians, while the Panama Defense Forces reported 150 deaths and 500 civilians.
The war also displaced many from their homes, resulting in thousands of refugees.
The European Parliament and the Organization of American States made a formal protest against the invasion and condemned it as a blatant violation of international law.
In 1992, Noriega was charged on eight counts of money laundering, racketeering, and drug trafficking.
He was found guilty and sentenced to 40 years in a federal prison, although later it was reduced to 30 years.

1.
Significance


The Invasion of Panama is considered by scholars as a precursor to the Gulf War where the US government showed the world its military capacity.
The war, while relatively short, strained diplomatic relations between the US and several Latin American nations with Peru recalling its ambassador from the US in protest.
Noriega’s case became the very first in the Jury’s history where a foreign leader was convicted of criminal charges.



####
document number 7: 
Gabon's Republican Guard uses Aravis vehicles in counter-coup operation


by Erwan de Cherisey

Gabon’s Republican Guard (GR) deployed Nexter Aravis mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicles (MRAPs) – a type it was not previously known to operate – during the operation to suppress a coup attempt in Libreville on 7 January.

Soldiers and vehicles – including an Aravis in the background – from the Republican Guard are seen outside the Radio Télévision Gabonaise building in Libreville on 7 January.
(Steve Jordan/AFP/Getty Images)


Led by a lieutenant, the coup plotters claimed to be part of a hitherto unknown organisation called the Patriotic Movement of the Defence and Security Forces Youth.
They took control of the headquarters of the national broadcaster Radio Télévision Gabonaise (RTG) early on 7 January and released a message announcing the establishment of a national restoration council to carry out a democratic transition.

By 1030 h local time the government claimed to have the situation under control after the Gabonese Gendarmerie Intervention Group (GIGN) assaulted the RTG building, killing two of the coup plotters and capturing most of the others; one escaped, but was captured in the afternoon.

Meanwhile, the GR, an elite component of the Gabonese Armed Forces primarily tasked with protecting President Ali Bongo and his family, deployed to secure strategic points in Libreville.

At least two GR Aravis MRAPs armed with ARX 20 remotely operated weapon stations were seen on the streets of Libreville in videos and photographs.
Other vehicles deployed included at least two Arquus Bastions, and two VBLs.

Nexter announced in October 2014 that Gabon had ordered 12 Aravis that would be armed with its ARX 20 to equip the battalion it would contribute to the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).



####
document number 8: 
Safeguarding Sudan’s Revolution







Sudanese civilians ride on the train to join in the celebrations of the signing of the Sudan's power sharing deal, that paves the way for a transitional governmentand eventually elections, following the overthrow of long-time leader Omar al-Bashir.




What’s new?
Since Omar al-Bashir’s 11 April ouster, Sudan’s military leadership and opposition alliance have appointed a new prime minister, formed a cabinet and assembled a supervisory council to oversee a power-sharing deal concluded on 17 August.
If honoured, the deal could pave the way for elections and civilian rule.

Why does it matter?
Sudan faces a crushing economic crisis, insurgencies and political polarisation, with a security establishment bent on keeping power and an opposition movement determined to instal a fully civilian administration.
The 17 August agreement represents the best pathway both to achieving reform and to averting spiralling violence.

What should be done?
The AU, U.S. and EU, together with Gulf states, should push the generals to respect the power-sharing deal.
They should encourage Khartoum to make peace with insurgents in peripheral areas.
The U.S. should rescind Sudan’s state sponsor of terrorism designation while maintaining pressure on the military in other ways.

Sudan has swung between hope and despair since 11 April, when the most sustained civilian protest movement in the country’s modern history swept Omar al-Bashir from power.
Many Sudanese celebrated Bashir’s ouster, seeing him as responsible for economic ruin and severe rights abuses.
But the generals who sought to placate the demonstrators by deposing Bashir have shown reluctance to cede power.
The security forces’ brutal 3 June attack on protesters in Khartoum repulsed the world and galvanised support for mediation that yielded a power-sharing agreement on 17 August.
Still, more outside support is needed to keep the transition on track.
The African Union (AU) should appoint an envoy to help bridge the gap of mistrust between parties.
For their part, Western powers should signal willingness to open the taps of badly needed financial support, encourage Khartoum to make peace with rebel factions on Sudan’s periphery, and sustain pressure on the generals’ Gulf allies to ensure that all sides abide by the deal Sudan needs to move ahead after Bashir’s rule.

In Sudan’s lopsided, patronage-driven economy, the top brass has a clear interest in clinging to political power.

There have been encouraging steps since the military leadership and civilian opposition signed a constitutional declaration sealing the power-sharing agreement at a ceremony by the Nile in Khartoum.
The parties named representatives to an eleven-member sovereign council that is to steer the country to free elections over the 39 months following 17 August.
A widely respected economist, Abdalla Hamdok, became prime minister four days after the ceremony, and a new cabinet took office on 8 September.
But the generals continue to wield enormous influence, and they have shown few signs that they intend to respect the Sudanese people’s demand for a civilian-led administration.
In Sudan’s lopsided, patronage-driven economy, the top brass has a clear interest in clinging to political power.

That is just one challenge among many.
In addition to being a potential spoiler, the security establishment is fragmented, unaccountable and subject to dangerous internecine rivalries.
The once-dominant army has lost its primacy to the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary group formed from the remnants of the Janjaweed militia of Darfur infamy and run by Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo "Hemedti", who may be the most powerful man in Sudan.
The country’s primary military and paramilitary organisations should be unified under one command, but that project will require patience and encouragement from outside powers like Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Forcing the issue could result in confrontation at a time when the last thing Sudan needs is more conflict.

Then there is the challenge of maintaining the unity of the extraordinarily broad civilian coalition – named the Forces for Freedom and Change – that has been at the vanguard of the uprising.
Comprising professional associations, civil society groups, unions, political parties and armed groups, the coalition has had its own internal struggles.
It will need to deftly manage them lest the security establishment use fissures in its unity to peel off constituents and weaken it politically.

There are also wars on the country’s periphery – in the Blue Nile, Kordofan and Darfur regions – that tear at national cohesion.
The transitional government should focus on ending these conflicts.

Yet for all the challenges standing in Sudan’s transitional path, there are reasons for hope.
For one thing, the protest movement’s strength and increasing sophistication set it apart from anything in the country’s recent history.
The generals have already seen that strong-arm tactics of the sort used to quell prior movements – for example in 2013 – are not likely to work here.
For another thing, a botched transition could stymie prospects for a surge of desperately needed international support and investment in Sudan’s flailing economy.
That is an outcome for which the security forces will almost certainly not wish to be blamed.

Against this backdrop, there is a good deal that outside actors – including African powers, Khartoum’s backers in the Gulf, Western states and multilateral organisations – can do to help the power-sharing arrangements succeed and nudge Sudan along the path of transition.

Diplomatically, regional actors (especially Ethiopia and the AU) played a key role in unlocking talks after the 3 June massacre and should continue to stay closely involved.
The AU should dispatch to Khartoum an envoy to support the transition by mediating between the two sides and helping guard against the possibility that the security establishment (with all its structural advantages) will steamroll the civilian opposition if there are disputes over the deal’s details.
The deal will be all the stronger if Western powers, including the U.S., keep up the pressure to honour it and press Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Egypt – all with close ties to the generals in Khartoum – to do the same.

There is also much to do on the economic front.
Rescuing Sudan’s anaemic economy will require broad international support through a major multilateral donor initiative.
Hamdok has estimated that the country needs a $10 billion infusion over the next two years.
Donors, including the U.S., the EU and its member states, and Gulf countries, should begin taking steps to support this request.
The U.S. should also move expeditiously to rescind Sudan’s designation as a state sponsor of terrorism, which forbids international financial institutions from issuing loans and impedes other foreign investment, thereby hobbling Sudan’s private sector.
Lifting the designation would help the newly appointed, civilian-led cabinet by giving it an early win and would be an important step toward Sudan’s qualifying for debt relief.
External partners should couple these supportive measures with stern warnings that spoilers in Khartoum who impede the economic and political reforms necessary for Sudan’s successful transition will be subject to targeted sanctions on the part of the AU, EU and U.S.

Sudan is one of Africa’s most important countries, sandwiched between two major powers, Ethiopia and Egypt, abutting the Red Sea and located in a region scarred by instability.
The benefits of a successful transition are potentially enormous, and the cost of state failure would be vast.
Until recently, it was hard to imagine a moment of opportunity like the country now faces.
It would be a mistake to squander it.

Khartoum/Addis Ababa/Nairobi/Abu Dhabi/Brussels, 21 October 2019





Murithi Mutiga, Crisis Group's Project Director for the Horn of Africa, reflects on the Sudanese revolution and on the challenges lying ahead for the new civilian-led administration in Khartoum.


Loading Video


Mass protests and a military coup have ended the 30-year dictatorship of Omar al-Bashir.
The same events have also released centrifugal forces in Sudan that could spark renewed violence if not contained by a coherent transition to civilian rule.
The civilian opposition that mobilised in the street yearns to bulldoze the former president’s corrupt, repressive legacy and hold fair elections.
But the security establishment, dominated by paramilitary forces once at the vanguard of state-sponsored slaughter in the Darfur region, now controls government arsenals as well as the country’s major revenue streams.
It is disinclined to relinquish these assets; thus, it could stymie reform.
The generals continue to receive backing from powerful Gulf monarchies and Egypt, which view them as a bastion of stability in the Horn of Africa and a source of manpower for military ventures in Yemen.

Negotiations between the civilian opposition and a military council representing the security establishment over a transitional agreement were fraught with tensions over the division of power.
The standoff culminated in a violent crackdown on 3 June, when paramilitary forces killed up to 120 protesters in the capital Khartoum.
The killings met with international opprobrium, with the UN and African Union (AU) issuing swift condemnations and the AU suspending Sudan’s membership.
The U.S., EU and UK then engaged with the Gulf states and Egypt, which corralled the junta into signing a power-sharing agreement on 17 July and accepting a constitutional declaration that was formally adopted one month later on 17 August.

The deal contemplates a transition to elections at the close of a 39-month period of reforms overseen by a civilian-dominated cabinet and legislature.
It also lays out the terms for forming the institutions that will see the country through the coming period.

At the centre of the arrangements is a "sovereign council" tasked with steering the transition, which consists of five opposition representatives, five members picked by the security forces and a civilian jointly nominated by both parties.
The Council moved swiftly to name a prime minister – economist Abdalla Hamdok – and a cabinet (with the military assigning the interior and defence portfolios).
The cabinet will report to a legislative council, two thirds of which the civilian opposition will appoint, and which is expected to fashion a constitution pending elections.
A general will head the sovereign council for the first 21 months of the transition before handing it over to a civilian for the remaining eighteen months pending elections.

But while critically important to guiding the country through a smooth transition, the deal reached over the summer goes only so far toward addressing some of the country’s most pressing needs.
These include the urgent task of transforming a deeply dysfunctional economy and bringing an end to long-running rebellions in areas that Khartoum has historically neglected.
The country’s bloated and fissiparous security machinery is a near-fatal drag on the state and needs restructuring.
Meanwhile, segments of the army and security services appear to resent the more powerful paramilitaries, which could easily spark feuding among the generals themselves.

This report describes Bashir’s fall from power, the power-sharing deal’s emergence and the challenges that Sudan’s transitional leadership will face.
It argues that the deal offers the best – and only viable – framework for addressing these challenges, steering the country toward reform, and avoiding the very real possibility that the country is instead pulled toward spiralling violence.
It is based on interviews conducted since January in Khartoum, Addis Ababa, Abu Dhabi, Washington, Brussels, London, Nairobi, New York and Juba.
It also builds on Crisis Group’s past work on Sudan’s long-term crisis.

Unlike many of his peers, Omar al-Bashir survived the 2011 Arab uprisings relatively unscathed.
It was subsequent setbacks that caused his eventual fall: an economic slump; the ensuing street protests in regime strongholds, including across Khartoum; the alienation of core constituencies, including within a regime security architecture beset by schisms between the armed forces and paramilitary units; and eroding support from sponsors in the Gulf.

The spark for the revolution was a rapidly declining economy.
Bashir had maintained his power by repressing political opposition, fighting costly counter-insurgencies in peripheral areas and underwriting his factious security sector with patronage-driven expenditures that ate up, by some estimates, 70 per cent of the national budget.
By late 2018, the economy had plunged to new depths, due to mismanagement, corruption and the loss of revenue following the secession of oil-rich South Sudan in 2011.
While, in 2017, the U.S. eased some financial and economic sanctions, the impact was modest; because Washington did not lift Sudan’s designation as a State Sponsor of Terrorism, the country remained off limits to many foreign investors.

Protests began in the south-eastern cities of Damazin and Sennar on 13 December 2018 over the tripling of bread prices and rising cost of other staples, as well as shortages of medicine, fuel and cash.
Many ATMs in banks had run dry, and queues at petrol stations stretched for kilometres.
Opposition parties, professional associations and unions marched and staged strikes.
By 19 December, when the snowballing demonstrations reached Atbara, a railway town and historic bastion of unionism in River Nile state, protesters were demanding regime change.

Several factors contributed to the movement’s strength.
Previous protests centred in Khartoum, for instance in 2011 and 2013, had struggled to expand beyond student and middle-class youth activist circles.
By contrast, the December demonstrations erupted outside the capital and leapt across geographic and class divides.
These new protests were also better organised through neighbourhood resistance committees that had learned from the failures of the 2013 protests, which Bashir’s forces put down with brute force, taking dozens of lives.

Of crucial significance throughout the rise of the movement was the participation of Sudanese women, whose position in society had suffered under Bashir’s brand of Islamist rule.
At several points during the uprising, women outnumbered men at protests.
Mainstream interest in women’s roles in the uprising surged when a photograph depicting Alaa Salah, a university student, standing on a car, dressed in a traditional white

toub

and leading chants, went viral.

The Sudanese Professionals Association (SPA), a grouping of labour and trade organisations formed in 2014, provided the movement’s backbone.
By bringing workers and professionals into the streets, the association evoked memories of previous popular uprisings in 1964 and 1985, also led by trade unionists.
Soon, the protests spread into affluent parts of Khartoum, where government officials live.
Anecdotes abound of the Khartoum elite’s sons and daughters joining the demonstrations.

On 1 January 2019, the SPA struck an alliance with 21 other organisations in a joint declaration calling for a national transitional government to replace Bashir.
The declaration marked the birth of the Forces for Freedom and Change (FFC) opposition coalition, which became the protest movement’s official voice.

As pressure mounted, Salah Gosh, chief of the National Intelligence and Security Services (NISS), held a meeting on 22 February 2019 with select newspaper editors and reporters to inform them that Bashir would no longer be head of the ruling National Congress Party (NCP).
He also said Bashir would not run in the 2020 election and that the president would dissolve the government, form a new administration composed of technocrats and launch a national dialogue to address Sudan’s challenges.
Officials leaked details of Gosh’s discussion with the journalists shortly after the meeting.
Some Sudanese rejoiced, hoping that Bashir would indeed engineer a transition and leave office.

But when Bashir spoke later that day, he instead proclaimed a state of emergency, installed military officers as governors of Sudan’s eighteen states and announced his second cabinet reshuffle in six months.
Bashir also formed a security committee composed of loyalists – though many would later turn against him.
Among its members were senior officers from the Sudanese Armed Forces; General Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo (known as Hemedti), leader of the RSF, the paramilitary group that Bashir increasingly relied upon as a praetorian guard; NISS officials including Gosh, whom Bashir was still keeping close; and a police representative.
But the divergence between what Gosh had told the journalists and what Bashir defiantly announced highlighted fissures within the regime.
Despite his position on the committee, ruling party figures say, Gosh soon began working in earnest to oust Bashir.

Amid these brewing tensions, public unrest put the cohesion of Bashir’s security committee to the test.
By April, managing the daily protests had depleted state funds: the treasury had to cover four months of overtime costs for police and other security agencies.
Meanwhile, inflation surged to as high as 70 per cent, emptying the pocketbooks of ordinary Sudanese.
Sensing the regime’s weakness, the protest movement dialled up the pressure, calling for larger and more audacious street actions.
On 6 April, protesters marched to army headquarters in Khartoum, as well as to military installations in other cities, and staged a sit-in.
Riot police and personnel from the intelligence services were poised to block the protesters’ advance, a source told Crisis Group, but elements of the security forces led by Gosh held them back.

At this point, Bashir still appeared confident that he could ride out the uprising.
While he remained an international pariah – the only sitting head of state ever indicted by the International Criminal Court – he had developed important security and economic partnerships with Gulf states and Turkey, which he may have believed would help him hang on to power.

As Crisis Group has described elsewhere, starting in 2013, the Gulf Cooperation Council developed a common policy of bringing Sudan closer into its orbit.
The primary motivation was to peel Khartoum away from arch-rival Tehran.
When the Saudi-led coalition launched its campaign in Yemen in 2015, its interest in the partnership intensified, as Sudan was possessed of both potential troops for the venture and a long Red Sea coastline that the coalition wanted, for strategic reasons, to ensure was in friendly hands.

For Bashir, the Saudi-led campaign in Yemen presented an opportunity.
In 2015, short on cash and eager for sanctions relief, he sought to solidify his alliance with Riyadh and Abu Dhabi by deploying roughly 10,000 RSF members and some regular army soldiers to fight alongside Saudi and Emirati troops.
A year later, Bashir severed ties with the Saudis’ nemesis Iran after protesters attacked the Saudi embassy and consulate in Tehran and Mashhad.
Riyadh, meanwhile, worked to keep Sudan on its side with cash and diplomatic support.

But Bashir’s relationship with the Gulf powers was nevertheless on less than firm ground.
For one thing, the Saudis and Emiratis harboured suspicions of Bashir, who maintained relations with their rivals Qatar and Turkey.
Bashir also alienated Riyadh and Abu Dhabi with his refusal to purge Islamists from his political machinery, security services and state bureaucracy.
From the moment Bashir took power in 1989, Egyptian authorities, later joined by Cairo’s allies in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi, were spooked by the Islamist bent of his administration and his ties to the Muslim Brotherhood, a group that Egypt’s security establishment considers its most potent domestic challenger and that the United Arab Emirates (UAE) views as a regional threat.

Fundamentally, Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo simply did not trust Bashir, whom they saw as highly transactional, requiring constant cultivation and forever at risk of sliding back in Tehran’s direction.
As Bashir’s grasp on power began to slip, the Gulf monarchies saw an opening to replace him with someone more reliable and gave their blessing to the generals planning to move against him.
A contact who was one of the last people to speak with Bashir before he was toppled said the president blamed Saudi Arabia and the UAE for his ouster.

The coup against Bashir came quickly and decisively.
When Hemedti, the RSF leader, turned against Bashir in the first week of April – as the protesters’ encampment outside military headquarters swelled – the balance of power tipped for good.
On 10 April, Bashir’s security committee made the decision to oust the strongman.
A member later reported that the committee deliberated for one hour, then disconnected Bashir’s phone and replaced his bodyguards.
A period of uncertainty followed as the generals, now a junta, worked to consolidate power.
Army officers arrived at the state television and radio stations just after 3am on 11 April, but it was another twelve hours before Lieutenant-General Ahmed Awad Ibn Ouf, Bashir’s first vice president, appeared to announce the president’s arrest and declare a state of emergency.

Ibn Ouf’s stint in power lasted only a day.
On 12 April, he appeared on television again to announce that he was stepping aside to make way for General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, an obscure figure who had overseen Sudan’s deployment to Yemen.
Before his promotion to army inspector general in February 2019, Burhan had served as the military attaché in China.
Many believe it was Hemedti who forced Ibn Ouf’s resignation, partly because he harboured his own ambitions for supremacy and saw the installation of the more pliant Burhan as a way to expand his own influence.

Ibn Ouf’s removal gave confidence to the protesters, who chanted "it fell once, it fell twice, it could fall a third time".
Within a few days, they began agitating against Burhan.
Under pressure to contain the revolt, the junta, now calling itself the Transitional Military Council, embarked on negotiations with the opposition coalition.
The two sides announced a framework on 15 May for a three-year transitional government to steer the country to elections and also agreed on mandates for the council of ministers, the legislature and a "sovereign council" to guide the transition.

The talks exposed divisions in the military council between hardliners and others willing to compromise.
Some of the council grumbled that the deal conceded too much without giving the security establishment sufficient protection from an opposition-controlled legislature.
A day later, on 16 May, the Transitional Military Council suspended the talks with the opposition coalition, instead making a show of meeting with less significant political parties.
Undeterred, the coalition stepped up the pressure.
On 28 and 29 May, the opposition alliance, pushed by elements such as the Communist Party, organised a general strike that shut down much of the country.

The standoff continued until 3 June, when security forces brutally dispersed the ten-week sit-in that had formed outside army headquarters on 6 April.
Opposition medics and media outlets documented that the raid killed up to 120 people.
In the days following the massacre, forces roamed the streets assaulting civilians and looting – an extraordinary breakdown of order in Khartoum.
Video and eyewitness testimony pin the bulk of the attack on Hemedti’s RSF, though other security forces appear to have taken part.
The massacre took place days after Hemedti visited the Saudi crown prince as well as leaders in Cairo and Abu Dhabi.

The bloody 3 June crackdown marked a turning point.
The attack, coupled with a string of arrests, a total shutdown of the internet and a ban on public events, served to re-energise and reunify the opposition alliance.
Indignant that the top brass appeared intent on clinging to power following Bashir’s fall, and outraged by not only the massacre but also a number of other smaller-scale killings of protesters, the opposition marshalled tens of thousands of Sudanese across the country for a "million-man" march on 30 June.

At the same time, the 3 June massacre provoked ire across the region and around the world.
The UN, the EU and AU, as well as various governments – including the U.S., UK and Germany – immediately issued calls for a transition to civilian rule.
The AU’s Peace and Security Council suspended Sudan’s membership in an unambiguous show of condemnation.
The U.S. also piled pressure on Gulf powers to lean on the junta to reach an accommodation with the protesters.
In a rare move, on 4 June, the U.S. State Department issued a readout of a call between Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Hale and Saudi Deputy Defence Minister Khaled bin Salman to discuss "the brutal crackdown against peaceful protesters [by the generals]".
The American asked the Saudis to use their influence with the junta to "encourage a transition to a civilian-led government in accordance with the will of the Sudanese people".

This combination of diplomatic pressure and internal protest – particularly the 30 June march – proved critical in drawing the generals back to the negotiating table.
The scale of the 30 June demonstration was especially important in making clear to the military council that this situation would not be a reprise of 2013 – when the Bashir government squashed a protest movement in part with promises of a national dialogue that never came to pass; the 2019 movement was simply too strong.
In July, the junta resumed direct talks with the opposition under the aegis of the AU and a special envoy designated by the Ethiopian prime minister, Abiy Ahmed.
By 17 July the two sides had endorsed what they described as a "political agreement" that would be followed by a formal "constitutional declaration" signed a month later on 17 August.
The power-sharing deal reached over the course of the summer laid out a blueprint for the transitional government and a roadmap for a 39-month transition to elections.
Still, many fault lines remained both between the parties involved in the agreement and within their respective ranks.

The Transitional Military Council that ousted Bashir was an awkward alliance of the competing security forces the deposed president left behind.
Under the terms of the power-sharing deal, it dissolved and ceded its authority on 21 August to an eleven-member "sovereign council" that comprises five members each from the security sector and the opposition, with one consensus civilian appointee, and is headed by General Abdel Fattah al-Burhan.
Much of the day-to-day responsibility for running the country has already passed to Prime Minister Hamdok and his cabinet, which manage the civil service, draw up the budget and oversee all state agencies outside the security sector.

In practice, however, and though the civilian-led cabinet has wide popular support, the security establishment continues to hold most instruments of raw power in the country.
It has control of the streets, a grip on Sudan’s illicit economy, and political and financial backing from foreign capitals, principally Riyadh and Abu Dhabi.

This establishment is far from being a cohesive body.
At its core, it comprises the Sudanese Armed Forces, Hemedti’s RSF, the intelligence services and allied militias.
It is vulnerable to internecine rivalries.
Its constituent parts have their own loyalties and political backgrounds.
Against this backdrop, the security sector represents a dual threat to the peace process.
It is, first and foremost, a spoiler that may try to block civilian oversight of the transitional government in order to preserve the extensive prerogatives it enjoyed under Bashir and has not yet been forced to yield.
Additionally, its internal divisions could spur instability if they blow up into armed clashes.

Sudan’s professional military weakened so drastically under Bashir that it is now just one power among many in the security sector.
The reasons for the Sudanese Armed Forces’ decline are many.
Bashir lost trust in the military following his 1999 falling-out with Hassan al-Turabi, Sudan’s leading Islamist, who had hand-picked much of the top brass.
Bashir’s suspicion of the generals hardened after the military failed to prevent the stunning assault on Khartoum by the Darfuri rebel Justice and Equality Movement in 2008.
Also, the lengthy insurgencies in Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile largely precluded the army from recruiting soldiers from those regions, eroding its claim to be a unifying national institution.

Rather than rebuild the military, Bashir increasingly opted to fund and arm local paramilitary groups, leading to the proliferation of groups such as Hemedti’s RSF, which, as discussed below, started out in Darfur and has grown more powerful than the army itself.

General al-Burhan, now head of the Sovereign Council, was a little known but senior officer.
In his current role, he acts as a bridge between the Sudanese Armed Forces and Hemedti, who was his deputy on the Transitional Military Council.
Like most high-ranking army officers, Burhan is from central Sudan, the bastion of Sudan’s political elite, in contrast to Hemedti, who comes from Darfur.

Burhan has broadly aligned the army with the RSF.
He is a known figure to the security forces of the junta’s two Gulf allies, the Saudis and Emiratis, due to his role as a commander in the Yemen campaign, to which Hemedti has also contributed men and resources.
Additionally, as a professional officer, Burhan is acceptable to Cairo, which wants to make sure that the military establishment, rather than Hemedti and others whose power derives from militias, is in charge in Khartoum.

Notwithstanding Burhan’s position atop the Sovereign Council, many in the army resent what they see as Hemedti’s increasing dominance.
They also take exception to the lucre that the RSF gleans from smuggling across Sudan’s borders (which the RSF controls), the artisanal gold market (which the RSF has cornered) and its position as the primary conduit of support from Sudan’s allies in Riyadh and Abu Dhabi.
Some of the army’s generals also have illicit sources of income, due to their privileges in a country where corruption is rampant, but in recent years the RSF have become the main actor in a rigged economy.
Many in the armed forces see the RSF as an ill-trained, undisciplined provincial militia.

The army’s rank and file have also had a different perspective on the protest movement than their counterparts in the RSF and intelligence services.
From the beginning of the uprising, many low- and mid-ranking members of the armed forces seemed to share some of the protest movement’s grievances – especially with respect to the collapsing economy – and to have more sympathy for the movement’s demands.
In contrast to the RSF and intelligence services, which were persistently brutal in their treatment of protesters until their leaders shifted their stance in April, members of the armed forces sometimes sought to shield the protesters from harm.

Some within the armed forces would like to restore the military’s prestige and dominance.
Hemedti, however, resisted suggestions by army generals during negotiations leading up to the power-sharing deal that the constitutional declaration outline the need to unify Sudan’s security forces.
For now, the military and RSF maintain an awkward alliance; however, as the transition progresses and with Hemedti seemingly intent on entrenching the RSF’s position and acquiring greater political power, some military officials could seek to halt his rise, which would likely trigger clashes between two powerful and well-armed organisations.

General Muhammad Hamdan Dagalo, known as "Hemedti", the boyish head of the RSF, is the most powerful man in the security forces.
Hemedti draws his strength from three primary sources.
First, he directly oversees much of the RSF, the pre-eminent paramilitary force among the many that Sudanese authorities spawned during Bashir’s three decades in power.
The RSF now appears to control Khartoum, as well as other towns and regions of the country, notably Darfur.
Secondly, he has acquired significant wealth, including proceeds derived from stakes in major gold mining operations, which he wields to extend his power and influence in Sudan’s transactional politics.
Thirdly, he has curried favour with Riyadh and Abu Dhabi, which see him as an accommodating strongman who – unlike Bashir – can be relied upon to serve as a bulwark against Islamist sympathisers in the military and bureaucracy.

Hemedti’s rise exemplifies the proliferation of non-conventional security "entrepreneurs" who have eclipsed Sudan’s conventional military.
Born to Chadian migrants, Hemedti dropped out of primary school but thrived as a trader.
The Darfur conflict gave him his entrance into Sudan’s power politics.
He joined the Janjaweed militia, then led by Musa Hilal, his maternal cousin and a prominent leader of the Mahamid tribe, a sub-group of the Rizeigat.
In 2009, Hemedti received his first government post as a security adviser to the governor of South Darfur.
There he served until 2011, when Bashir helped him set up the RSF, a rebranding of the Janjaweed.

Hemedti benefited when Bashir tapped him to take down Musa Hilal, whom the president judged disloyal.
The Hemedti-Hilal conflict escalated to armed clashes in 2017, with Hemedti coming out on top.
Hilal was arrested and imprisoned by state authorities.
As Hilal’s fortunes declined, Hemedti took control of the lucrative gold mine they once jointly controlled.

Hemedti has thrived as a businessman, establishing several companies under the umbrella of his al-Junaid conglomerate.
His company, al-Junaid for Roads and Bridges, was awarded government contracts to help build at least three highways in Darfur (the Nyala-Fashir, Kutum-Fashir and Genina-Zalingei routes).
His mining company operates in Jebel Amir and has started working in southern Darfur.

Bashir’s 2015 decision to send troops to fight under the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen provided Hemedti with a major boost.
He sent troops in much larger numbers than Sudan’s regular military did.
RSF troops also took more front-line positions than the military’s rank and file, who are generally more risk-averse and therefore often deployed defensively, such as to guard the Saudi Arabian border.
The RSF’s ranks were swelled by recruits from many impoverished families who were highly motivated by the financial rewards, which could reach up to $10,000 each per offensive deployment.
Some even paid bribes to go.
Apart from his role in the Yemen campaign, Hemedti has authorised a representative to forge an alliance with the UAE’s ally General Khalifa Haftar in Libya.
Some diplomats, inside and outside the region, express concern that Abu Dhabi is cultivating Hemedti as a long-term security partner.

In early 2017, Sudan’s parliament passed the Rapid Support Forces Act, which put the paramilitaries directly under the office of the president, cementing their evolution from peripheral militia to quasi-presidential guard.
Bashir began referring to Hemedti as Hemayti, which translates from Arabic as "my protection".
In the end, however, when Bashir’s fortunes had begun to shift dramatically, Hemedti turned on his patron, sealing the former president’s fate.

Hemedti’s ambitions for power and influence have led him to cultivate relationships well outside Sudan’s borders.
Conspicuously, the RSF’s ranks feature men who are not Sudanese nationals.
Meanwhile, Hemedti, whose Arab tribe straddles the border between Chad and Sudan, has used his ancestry to forge links to eastern Chad, as well as circles of power in N’djamena.
He also maintains ties with armed groups in the Central African Republic.
South Sudan’s rebel leader Riek Machar, hosted by authorities in Khartoum, has also attempted to build ties with Hemedti and travelled with him for talks with President Salva Kiir in September.

While Hemedti lacks Bashir’s charisma and is considered a thuggish provincial warlord by Khartoum’s elites, he has played his distance from those elites to his advantage.
He has fashioned a role for himself as a champion of Sudanese outside the country’s relatively prosperous centre, seeking to portray the opposition alliance and the military as overly focused on concentrating power in Khartoum and the Nile valley.
He has also presented himself as the key figure seeking to end the communal conflicts that have ravaged Sudan’s eastern and western peripheries.
While in some ways a remarkable role for Hemedti to assume, given that earlier in his career he led militias accused of perpetrating some of the worst killings in Darfur, it allows him to trade on the close ties he reportedly enjoys with several armed groups.

The economic, military and diplomatic clout Hemedti has amassed is formidable.
"He almost doesn’t need to carry out a coup because he has created a role for himself as an alternative to the state and to Khartoum’s elites", one diplomat who recently spent time in Khartoum told Crisis Group.

Until the past decade, the National Intelligence and Security Services were a pillar of Bashir’s rule.
Its members are primarily drawn from Bashir’s riverine stronghold and were viewed as more loyal than the army’s soldiers, who have historically been recruited from a diverse pool.
But the intelligence services declined in power and influence as Bashir became more paranoid about internal challenges to his rule.

The long-time intelligence chief, Salah Gosh, was formerly regarded as one of the most powerful people in Sudan and as a rival to Bashir.
By 2011, it became clear to Bashir that Gosh and the service he commanded could threaten his rule.
As a result, he sidelined Gosh and curtailed the intelligence services’ operational capabilities.
In November 2012, Sudanese authorities detained Gosh, accusing him of plotting to sabotage the government.
Bashir rehabilitated him six years later and reappointed him intelligence chief in February 2018.

Although in the intervening period the RSF had emerged as Bashir’s favourite security force, when protests broke out in December 2018, Gosh’s apparatus spearheaded the crackdown.
Overwhelmed with detainees, Gosh scrambled to build new jail cells and repurpose ordinary prison quarters to hold the service’s detainees.
But, as noted above, Gosh soured on Bashir after the latter’s apparent about-face on initiating a transition in February 2019.
In April 2019, Gosh appeared to allow the protests to swell, and even to permit the 6 April sit-in to form in front of army headquarters in Khartoum.
For a few weeks, the intelligence services’ vehicles disappeared from the streets; intimidation and arrests stopped.

By this time, Gosh and Hemedti were conspiring to oust Bashir.
But the relationship between the two security chiefs soon began to deteriorate.
Gosh saw himself as a leader and resented Hemedti’s apparent ambitions.
For his part, Hemedti distrusted Gosh.

Many in the protest movement also distrusted Gosh, given his role suppressing protests and running a service many Sudanese blamed for gross human rights abuses (including administering a network of makeshift prisons where detainees were allegedly tortured).
After initially resisting calls from the movement to leave office when Bashir fell, he resigned on 13 April.
A few weeks after Gosh quit, police directed by the Transitional Military Council chiefs tried to arrest him on corruption charges, but intelligence services officers, who remained loyal to him, prevented his detention.
Soon afterward, Gosh left the country, reportedly to Egypt, where he appears to have remained active in trying to shape events in Sudan.

Gosh’s rivals have worked to dismantle his power base in the intelligence services.
After Gosh left office, Hemedti used his influence to sack dozens of officers from the intelligence services.
And in July, the Transitional Military Council announced that the NISS would become the General Intelligence Service, dedicated solely to intelligence gathering and losing its other internal security capabilities.
The RSF has reportedly folded many former NISS officers, particularly those from its operational arm, into its ranks – thereby further strengthening Hemedti.

On 15 August, the U.S. State Department announced that it would sanction Gosh, in what observers viewed as a warning to influential Sudanese attempting to sabotage the transition.

As Khartoum’s transitional government seeks to turn the corner on Bashir’s brutal legacy and create a foundation for stable future governance, security sector reform will be critically important.
Two near-term objectives for the transitional government should be 1) to make the security services more accountable for their abuses and 2) to start to bring the country’s primary military and paramilitary organisations under a single command.

Concerning the first objective, the civilian leadership of the transitional cabinet should work with the legislative council, when it is formed, to repeal laws that give the security forces immunity from prosecution for crimes committed in the course of duty.
A change to this legal regime, one of the world’s most permissive, would signal that the government no longer tolerates wanton abuses of power by the state’s agents and would be in keeping with the commitment all sides made in the constitutional agreement to implement "legal reform (and) rebuild and develop the human rights and justice system".

As for the second objective, the most significant challenge will almost certainly be how to deal with the RSF, which exists outside the formal military.
As a Western diplomat put it: "It is difficult to see how Sudan can be a democracy if individuals control quasi-private militias outside the command of the formal armed forces".

The RSF’s wealth and power mean that simply disbanding it – which many within the opposition coalition understandably call for – is not realistic.
Instead, Prime Minister Hamdok, the military leadership and the RSF should continue discussions broached by the opposition coalition and some within the armed forces during this summer’s negotiations about the power-sharing agreement on the possibility of merging the security forces.
In this scenario, RSF commanders and troops would retain their jobs but fall under the military command’s authority.
Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo, which all have stated their commitment to stability in Sudan, should emphasise to RSF leadership that placing the country’s security forces under unified command is essential for achieving this goal and encourage them in this direction.
Patience and persistence will be necessary, however, as the RSF benefits greatly from the status quo and is therefore likely to be very resistant to this sort of change.

If domestic consensus can be achieved, actors such as the EU, which have experience in backing reform of the security sector and reintegration efforts, could offer support for the reintegration into society of those RSF militiamen who do not want to join the army and would prefer to go back to civilian life.

The Forces for Freedom and Change is a fragile coalition of parties, political personalities, unions and civil activist groups often with competing interests, divergent constituencies and opposing ideologies.
Some veteran opposition party leaders within its ranks are part of the same old guard that many Sudanese view as sharing responsibility for the country’s woes.
Its younger leadership cohort, however, particularly the professionals and civil society figures who organised the protest movement, enjoy great credibility with the public, as demonstrated by their capacity repeatedly to summon tens of thousands of Sudanese into the streets.

Throughout, the opposition has shown not only determination but also a mastery of optics.
The sit-in outside the army’s Khartoum headquarters was redolent with symbolism – and made for great television.
In naming Ahmed al-Rabia, a schoolteacher who drives a taxi at night to supplement his income, as a chief spokesman in April, the opposition drew a sharp contrast between its support base – ordinary Sudanese seeking change – and the generals who got rich during Bashir’s long rule.

The Forces for Freedom and Change coalition is expected to form the bedrock of support for efforts to institute full civilian rule at the end of the pivotal 39-month transition, but it is a work in progress.
For all the FFC’s accomplishments, it is not yet clear whether its many component organisations will maintain the unity required to check the security sector.

The coalition represents a wide diversity of professional, civil society and political organisations, and its internal dynamics are correspondingly complex.
Upon its formation in January 2019, a few weeks after protests broke out, the coalition assembled its coordinating committee, which steered the movement until Bashir’s ouster, at which point the political parties became more dominant and led the negotiations.
Its most active members were the Sudanese Professionals Association, the civil society group Sudan Call (a collection of Sudan’s more established political parties, rebel representatives and civil society activists) and other lobbies, including the Families of Ramadan Martyrs and the No to Women’s Oppression Initiative.
As the protests took shape, established political parties also began to play a bigger role in the movement.

Of these groups, the Sudanese Professionals Association was and remains most prominent in the public eye.
The group formed in 2014, remained fairly inactive until 2018, and then assumed a leadership role in the uprising.
Civil society groups rallied around the SPA’s leadership and mainstream opposition parties lent it behind-the-scenes support, realising that they lacked the popular legitimacy to lead the movement.
This tactical decision accelerated the protests’ momentum and also boosted the SPA’s popularity.
By December 2018, the group consisted of seven underground professional syndicates and trade unions, led by a committee of the union heads.
The SPA remained at the vanguard of protests until 11 April, when the military moved against Bashir, at which point it assumed a lower profile.
Said one local political analyst: "For once, the opposition managed not to shoot itself in the foot".

Still, the coalition has had its challenges.
For one thing, some groups believe the coalition has been too accommodating.
A bloc known as the National Consensus Forces split with leading coalition member Sudan Call in March over the latter’s decision to participate in a proposed AU-led dialogue with Bashir’s government.
Two members of the bloc – the Sudanese Communist Party and the Popular Congress Party – subsequently announced that they would not join the yet-to-be-formed legislative council or nominate members to the cabinet because in their view the FFC had offered too many concessions to the generals.

Another grievance that some groups complain of is under-representation.
This is a particular concern for the Sudan Revolutionary Front, an umbrella for armed groups that have fought insurgent campaigns on Sudan’s periphery.
The Revolutionary Front and National Umma Party have together called for formation of a leadership council that would represent the coalition’s different strands and be its decision-making body.
Civil society groups, particularly the SPA, initially opposed this idea, contending that the existing flat structure, involving hundreds of neighbourhood committees and a faceless coordinating committee, was better positioned to avoid detection by Bashir’s repressive security apparatus.
Nevertheless, in the weeks leading up to the 3 June attack on protesters, civil society leaders began negotiations about forming the leadership council.
The 3 June massacre disrupted these plans, as many leading coalition figures (especially youth leaders) went into hiding, but once mediation began, the council was formed.

Beyond addressing grievances that could threaten internal cohesion, the opposition will need to communicate more effectively and promptly with the public as part of efforts to improve its capacity as a serious political player.
Over the course of the summer’s transition talks, it was a source of public frustration and apprehension that the opposition, understandably accustomed to operating secretly, closely guarded information on progress that was being made.
Outside civil society organisations and donors, including the EU, U.S. and others, should encourage opposition leadership to be more open and to welcome a flourishing public debate on Sudan’s future as part of their efforts to build support for the transition.

Another risk to the opposition is that the generals could seek to widen the opposition’s internal divisions by co-opting its constituents.
One potentially important fissure is along geographic lines.
As indicated above, the opposition is already exposed to the criticism that it is too dominated by metropolitan elites and draws a disproportionate number of its leaders from Khartoum.
Against this backdrop, Hemedti has cast himself as a champion of rural Sudan and cultivated alliances with the leaders of armed groups that opposed Bashir and should be the opposition coalition’s natural allies.
He could strengthen these ties and try to peel off other coalition partners using similar tactics, weakening the coalition at a time when unity will be critical to its efforts to loosen the generals’ hold on power.
For this reason, it will be important for the opposition to be attentive in their actions and policies to both the rebels’ desire for a serious voice in coalition decision-making and to their concerns about Sudan’s treatment of its citizens in its long-neglected peripheries, as discussed below.

Sudan’s centre-periphery tensions predate the Bashir era, but its internal wars intensified under the deposed president.
South Sudan eventually seceded, while wars expanded to more places in the north.
Mass atrocities perpetrated by Bashir’s security forces in Darfur led to his indictment by the International Criminal Court, the first of a sitting head of state.

The new transitional government must reckon with the legacy of decades of efforts by elites in the wealthier riverine centre to subdue rebellions across the country by force.
This legacy encompasses several regions devastated by conflict, huge displaced populations and an array of rebel movements, some scattered outside Sudan’s borders.
Bringing peace to warring areas should be a priority during the transitional period and will require careful consideration of the accommodations that the rebels are seeking.
These include steps to reverse the imposition of Islamic law on religious minorities, separate religion and state, and provide for a fairer distribution of power and resources to areas in the periphery, including by allowing them to elect governors rather than imposing these from distant Khartoum.

Abdelaziz al-Hilu, who, as noted below, leads the largest faction of the Sudanese People’s Liberation Army-North, characterised the rebels’ core grievances to Crisis Group as structural.
Al-Hilu said Arabic-speaking elites in Khartoum have long tried to impose a "false Arab identity" on a culturally diverse country.
This attitude, he said, impelled minorities to take up arms to protect their position in society.
He added that successive regimes have worsened centre-periphery relations with the logic of political Islam, which casts non-Muslims as second-class citizens.
Al-Hilu concluded by saying: "The other in Sudan is always oppressed, marginalised and excluded when it comes to access to power and wealth.
The other in Sudan is left with only two options, either to accept inferiority status or be exterminated".

The nature of Sudan’s internal conflicts changed after South Sudan’s 2011 independence.
Rebel remnants from Darfur, South Kordofan and Blue Nile regrouped into the Sudanese Revolutionary Front.
At the time, the Darfur conflict had raged for years, but the conflict in the latter two areas was just restarting after a respite ushered in by the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
In its first two years, the Front, supported by Juba, made significant battlefield gains and threatened the central government’s hold on the provinces where the fighting was taking place.
The group also forged an alliance with the political opposition, joining Sudan Call.

The Front has since splintered, however, limiting its relevance as an armed force.
Among its constituent parts, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction under Malik Agar, of Blue Nile, and Yasir Arman, of northern Sudan, lost most of its fighters following a bitter split in 2017.
Darfuri rebel leader Minni Minnawi’s Sudan Liberation Army faction is now based in Libya as mercenaries fighting on behalf of General Haftar.
The fighting force of the Justice and Equality Movement under Jibril Ibrahim is thought to have dwindled below a few hundred operating in South Sudan and Libya.
These groups’ political strength among Sudanese is difficult to gauge but is likely eroding, even in war-affected regions.

Though vocal in its efforts to get a seat at the table during transitional agreement talks, the Front is in reality overshadowed by larger, more powerful armed groups that sit outside it.
One is the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North faction led by Hilu, who took most of the rebel fighters with him in the 2017 split.
Hilu has a secure stronghold in the Nuba Mountains of South Kordofan and commands the largest rebel faction in Blue Nile.
Another is the Sudan Liberation Movement faction of Abdul-Wahid al-Nur, which is the only remaining significant rebel force in Darfur.
Nur’s faction has declined in power in its Jebel Marra stronghold during his long self-imposed exile in France, as has the strength of his personal command.
Both leaders disengaged from peace talks in Bashir’s final years – especially Nur, who earned notoriety among diplomats for his consistent refusal to enter negotiations.

But even if the Front is no longer the most powerful of the armed groups, both the coalition and the generals have vied for influence over it, conscious of its symbolic significance and potential spoiler role.
Negotiations in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa in July 2019 made headway in aligning the Front’s demands with the coalition’s positions but in the end the rebel leaders walked out.
Tensions remain rife: as noted above, the Front has griped about the coalition’s decision-making process and having to play second fiddle to the civilian leaders, whom they see as another collection of aloof riverine elites.
Meanwhile, Hemedti, whom the military council charged with outreach to Sudan’s rebel movements, has been in touch through his own channels with the Front’s members.
His late June meeting with Minnawi, brokered by Chadian President Idriss Deby, fed speculation that the generals are working to pull the rebels away from the coalition and into their corner.

South Sudan and Egypt have also sought roles as mediators between Sudan’s generals and rebels.
South Sudan, which historically has been the main backer of several of the armed groups, has taken the lead in marshalling these parties to find a compromise.
In the first week of September, its president, Salva Kiir, hosted key armed group leaders for talks and subsequently met Prime Minister Hamdok.
On 11 September, the parties signed the Juba Declaration, indicating that Juba would remain the sole forum for peace talks.
South Sudan is likely to remain an important actor as it seeks to cultivate ties with the new administration in Khartoum on this role, having lost its prior channel, which relied on Bashir.
The benefits of a long-term sustainable peace would be considerable.
It would mean that humanitarian workers could gain easier access to regions long under siege from the security forces while a permanent ceasefire – potentially overseen by AU monitors – would allow local populations freedom of movement across lines previously controlled by the patchwork of belligerents active across rural Sudan.

The coup against Bashir and the generals’ consolidation of power with Gulf backing has put Sudan’s Islamist political machinery, embodied in recent years primarily by the ruling National Congress Party, out of order.
Its incapacity may be temporary, however, since it still controls layers of the state bureaucracy and military.
A failed counter-coup attempt on 24 July, reportedly involving Islamist-allied military personnel, suggests that at least some of Bashir’s old guard may see themselves as his legitimate heirs.

Sudan’s version of the so-called deep state has its roots in the country’s Islamist movement, which Bashir co-opted first to mount his own coup in 1989 and later to extend his rule.
This movement, the National Islamic Front, was led by the prominent preacher Hassan al-Turabi for almost ten years.
It was a major component of Sudan’s ruling party and controlled much of the government bureaucracy.

Though Bashir later fell out with Turabi and rebranded the Front as the National Congress Party, Bashir’s coalition continued to comprise Islamists acting in concert with security factions and opportunists.
Bashir gradually shunted the party aside in the final years of his rule in a desperate attempt to disassociate himself from a political entity that many Sudanese blamed for the collapsing economy.
Despite the NCP’s troubles, however, its members remain part of a relatively well-resourced and entrenched political network on the outside of the power-sharing arrangements.
Two Islamist political organisations that are also on the sidelines are the Popular Congress, which Turabi founded after his split with Bashir, and Reform Now.
Both were once allied with Bashir but decided to back the protests that toppled him.

Given their nationwide political machinery and extensive financial resources after decades of access to government resources and contracts, the NCP and allied parties could yet emerge as powerful post-Bashir actors.
In the spring of 2019, after the state of emergency declaration and weeks before Bashir’s ouster, party leaders reportedly began scheming about where and how to hide their wealth.
The NCP could be positioning itself to return to the political scene, and it may have some inside support.
To their Egyptian and Gulf backers, the generals claim to be purging Islamist forces from the military and senior ranks of the civil service but some observers believe that the former junta and the NCP have a quiet truce.

By standing apart from the transition, and in fact defining themselves in opposition to both the civilian coalition and the generals, parties associated with Islamism could well profit from the inevitable challenges that the transitional government will face.
Because they are outside of it, they stand to gain public support should the transitional government be unable to deliver on key promises, especially with respect to reviving the economy.
Further, they may be able to call upon eager patrons in Qatar and Turkey, which are both looking for opportunities to regain their foothold in Khartoum.

That said, both Abu Dhabi and Riyadh are keen to keep parties with strong links to Islamists in political exile.
These two monarchies calculate that Sudan’s security forces are their most dependable ally in that regard.
The civil society component of the opposition coalition has also consistently rejected any accommodation with Muslim Brotherhood-style political Islam, identifying it as a legacy of Bashir that must be swept away.

Sudan has gripped the attention of Western, Gulf and African observers who are concerned, among other things, by the prospect of the Sudanese state’s implosion.
External actors have had to grapple with a complex crisis, notable for deep schisms between the key actors who will determine the country’s future as well as divisions within the negotiating blocs themselves.
Consistent, unified support for Sudan’s political negotiations is necessary to avoid a breakdown of the civilian-military transitional administration on whose shoulders Sudan’s near-term fate now rests.
Indeed, without substantial external pressure, it is unlikely that the junta would have acceded to the concessions necessary to arrive at the deal adopted 17 August.

The AU and Ethiopia have been critical to bridging the divide between the opposition coalition and security establishment.

Until the 3 June massacre, the two sides refused offers of international and regional mediation, but the killings in Khartoum created new pressure to talk.
International revulsion over the massacre found expression in the AU’s 6 June decision to suspend Sudan’s membership.
The action by the Peace and Security Council, reportedly taken in spite of lobbying on Sudan’s behalf by Egypt, illustrated the generals’ growing isolation after the killings.
Still, even as pressure for mediation grew, it was not immediately clear which regional and international actors would get traction.
The AU Commission renewed its offer to step in, but the Sudanese parties initially rebuffed its efforts.

In the end, it was Abiy Ahmed, Ethiopia’s prime minister, who reset the talks.
Four days after the massacre, Abiy arrived in Khartoum, wearing the hat of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, a regional body that Ethiopia now chairs.
He quickly met with both sides, leaving senior diplomat Mahmoud Dirir behind as his envoy.
Critically, Abiy’s effort received the public and private backing of the UAE, which had previously played a key role in brokering Ethiopia’s rapprochement with Eritrea.

After talks got under way, apparent disunity between the AU and Ethiopian envoys stymied early efforts at achieving a breakthrough.
The envoys offered contrasting proposals to the opposition and military council, each containing different numbers for the composition of the planned legislative and sovereign councils.
But after discussions in Addis, the AU and Ethiopian envoys closed ranks on 26 June, and presented both sides with a joint proposal, which became the basis for the 17 July political accord and the constitutional declaration eventually adopted on 17 August.
The formula for the sovereign council that finally proved acceptable – with five members each appointed by the civilian coalition and the generals and an eleventh jointly chosen civilian – echoed the initial Ethiopian proposals.

Coordinating Western and Gulf pressure on the parties to reach a negotiated deal took some time.
In the weeks and months leading up to Bashir’s ouster, many Sudanese protesters were frustrated at the relative silence of key Western countries.
Even after Bashir fell, pivotal players, notably Washington, which had de facto led the Troika partnership effort to stabilise Sudan and South Sudan dating back to the early 2000s, stayed largely out of the fray.
The opposition, Addis Ababa, Washington and European governments were together frustrated with Riyadh and Abu Dhabi for supporting Sudan’s military council notwithstanding signals that it did not intend to share power with civilians.

Two international initiatives helped bring Western and Gulf governments together with regional actors behind a common position.

The first to form was the Friends of Sudan contact group, an initiative primarily driven by Western diplomats, which met first in May in Washington and included representatives from the UN, AU, EU and Ethiopia, and which expanded to include Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Qatar at its second meeting in Berlin in June.
A statement after the June meeting, issued by the German foreign ministry, said all agreed on the need for a transition to civilian rule.
One Western official, however, described this forum as "cosmetic" – useful primarily for coordinating financial aid packages – mainly because neither Saudi Arabia nor the UAE, the junta’s critical backers, sent high-level delegations.

Indeed, it was a second – smaller, quieter and more informal – group that proved more effective.
On the sidelines of a Quad (the U.S., the UK, Saudi Arabia and the UAE) ministerial meeting in London regarding Yemen in late April the group discussed Sudan.
Those discussions ultimately led to a secret, Quad-brokered meeting in Khartoum on 29 June between the military council, including Hemedti, and opposition coalition leaders, to cool temperatures in advance of the next day’s "million-man" march.

Beyond these group efforts, Washington also pressured Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo through bilateral channels.
In public, the U.S. pointedly condemned the 3 June killings and pressed the Saudis to do more so that the junta would change course.
In visits to Cairo and Riyadh in July, U.S. Special Envoy Donald Booth, appointed just nine days after the Khartoum massacre, made it clear that Washington supported a negotiated compromise and backed calls for a civilian-led administration.

U.S. pressure on Saudi Arabia and the UAE, the junta’s principal external backers, paved the way for such compromise.
Diplomats who follow the region differ as to whether the two Gulf countries decided after 3 June that the military could not govern effectively using purely strong-arm tactics, or whether they were more focused on the need to defuse the immediate situation given the global backlash the June violence engendered.
Either way, Washington’s diplomacy helped focus both Riyadh and Abu Dhabi on the importance of shifting their posture, which they did.

Although Egypt, another critical player, also altered its position and began pressing the junta to compromise, Cairo looks at Sudan through a somewhat different lens than the Gulf states.
Its involvement in Sudan is rooted in its historical desire to maintain political stability in an important neighbour, as well as to thwart Islamist movements it views as extensions of the Muslim Brotherhood.
But it is also invested in preventing its regional rival Ethiopia from outflanking it in shaping Sudan’s post-Bashir order, and maintaining sufficient influence to defend its interests in a country through which the Nile river, critical to Egypt’s survival, charts its course from the Ethiopian highlands.
Against this backdrop, Egypt’s persistent closeness to the generals – with whom it has met numerous times since Bashir’s ouster – will likely continue to be a channel for Cairo to assert itself in a political environment where it is competing with Addis, and where Ethiopia’s Abiy remains popular with the opposition following his mediation efforts this summer.

The deal reached this summer was hard-won and remains Sudan’s best hope.
If implemented, it can prevent – for now – a worst-case scenario of spiralling violence and state collapse.
Yet the path ahead remains daunting.
A central challenge moving forward will be maintaining coordinated pressure from across several continents to make sure that the deal sticks and Sudan’s transition remains on a firm footing.

A key driver of the protests that forced Bashir out of power was the parlous state of Sudan’s economy.
The new administration inherits the challenge of improving the lives of millions of Sudanese immiserated by decades of ruinous policies.
Widespread corruption, massive transfers of capital abroad by the top brass and NCP insiders and extravagant expenditure on the defence sector contributed to an economic crisis exacerbated by high inflation, enormous foreign debt and widespread shortages of essential goods, including fuel, bread and medicine.

In recent months, technocrats from the opposition have devised what they describe as an "emergency plan" to revive the economy.
Among its worthy components are reforming key institutions, including the central bank, to ensure that all government revenue is channelled through formal institutions and not into the generals’ coffers; tackling the parallel currency market as part of an effort to stabilise the overvalued official currency; setting up a system to encourage and facilitate remittances from Sudan’s vast diaspora; and trebling the budgetary allocation to the health and education sectors from 5 to at least 15 per cent.

Prime Minister Hamdok, whose most recent posting was as deputy executive secretary and chief economist at the UN Economic Commission for Africa, has the right training and expertise to take on this task.
But he faces an enormous obstacle in the form of Sudan’s debt stock, which stands at close to $60 billion.
Securing debt relief from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Sudan’s Paris Club creditors, however, is bound up with the question of whether the U.S. government will rescind its 1993 designation of Sudan as a state sponsor of terrorism (SST), which was imposed at a time when Khartoum hosted al-Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden.

Given the politics surrounding the SST issue in the U.S. and in light of historically fraught relations between Washington and Khartoum, lifting the designation will not be straightforward.
Moreover, even if it is lifted, Sudan’s arrears of $2.6 billion will nevertheless preclude debt relief until they can be cleared.

Still, Khartoum – along with its European and Gulf partners – should press for lifting the SST designation, and Washington should acquiesce.
There are more than enough economic, symbolic and political reasons to move forward with the SST lifting as soon as possible.
In addition to being a necessary though insufficient step toward debt relief (which will also require meeting benchmarks for fiscal transparency in addition to clearing arrears), lifting the SST designation will open the way for international banks to re-engage with Sudan, reconnect the country to the international financial system, signal to foreign investors that the country is open for business and make clear to the world that Washington no longer considers Khartoum a pariah.
Rescission will also pave the way for the loosening of other U.S. legislation and executive orders that restrict aid and U.S. economic ties to Sudan.

Perhaps most critically, on the political level rescission will be an important win for Hamdok, who can use it to consolidate public support at a moment when he will need all the strength he can muster.
Just weeks ago, Hamdok made an impassioned appeal to the UN General Assembly to help him rehabilitate Sudan’s international image and lobbied for the U.S. to lift the SST designation.
Lifting it will show that he can deliver.
Although U.S. government officials have indicated to external interlocutors that lifting could take up to a year once there is a decision to do it, there is nothing in the laws governing rescission to indicate that it needs to take so long, and former executive branch officials suggest that there is precedent for moving much more quickly.
Moreover, even if there are hidden impediments in the case of Sudan, the U.S. government can signal its intention now, pledging to move as quickly as possible toward rescission – a signal of support that would serve Hamdok well.

Some knowledgeable observers have argued against taking this step before the RSF has demonstrated that it will allow the transitional authorities to make needed reforms and negotiate peace.
They are understandably concerned that rescission will eliminate Washington’s key tool for pressing Sudanese hardliners not to spoil the transition.

Kicking the can down the road has considerable downsides, however.
Indeed, there are strong arguments militating for lifting the SST designation even if Sudan were not negotiating a delicate political transition.
For one thing, some commentators (including Crisis Group) have long expressed concern that the sanctions flowing from the designation disproportionately hurt the Sudanese people, create a shadow economy that empowers senior security officials and their cronies, and give the country’s leadership an excuse for its poor economic performance.
For another thing, it is hardly clear that Sudan – which obviously no longer hosts Osama bin Laden and has for years been a U.S. counter-terrorism partner – satisfies the criteria for being an SST any longer.

But the central consideration should be that Sudan is in the midst of a delicate political transition, where lifting the designation has the potential to create positive momentum and maintaining it could have perilous consequences.
Securing a rescission of Khartoum’s SST status would give Hamdok the political win alluded to above and boost prospects for a successful transition.
It would demonstrate to the Sudanese people that moving toward civilian government – as they have been doing over the course of the past year – can open doors that were long closed to the country and give it a chance at a more prosperous future.
By contrast, the longer Washington delays in lifting the designation, the more the generals will be able to sow doubt that the civilians entrusted with Sudan’s transition are capable of bringing about the economic turnaround the country needs.

To be sure, if the U.S. moves forward with SST lifting, there is a risk that the generals will subsequently seek to derail the transition, and Washington will have lost one tool for influencing them.
But there are other pressures that may help to keep the generals in line.
For a start, even if the SST designation is lifted, Sudan will still need to meet certain reform benchmarks (especially with respect to fiscal transparency) in order to qualify for debt relief.
Whether the generals might be willing to risk public outrage and Sudan’s economic future in order to spoil the reforms and deny Hamdok a win is simply not clear; some analysts doubt it.
To help manage this risk, Washington and Brussels should also signal loud and clear that spoilers who impede Sudan’s economic or political transition will be targeted for financial sanctions – as will their networks, companies and commercial facilitators.
The AU Peace and Security Council, which already warned on 7 June that it would "impose punitive measures on individuals and entities obstructing [the transition]", should reinforce this threat to deter spoilers.

Beyond SST rescission, the U.S. and other partners should be considering other ways to strengthen Hamdok’s hand at this pivotal moment.
One important step would be for them to create a broad economic relief package for the country that can help support the prime minister’s government while he embarks on necessary reforms.
This donor effort should involve the World Bank, the U.S., the EU and its member states, the Islamic Development Bank, the Saudi Fund for Development, the Abu Dhabi Fund for Development and other members of the Friends of Sudan international forum, such as Qatar.
All participating entities should pool funds for budget support and coordinated development projects and channel them to the government through a lead agency such as the World Bank or the African Development Bank.

Additionally, to help Khartoum put its financial house in order, Hamdok should request, and foreign donors should provide, technical assistance to help Sudan’s ministries track state revenues and illicit rent-seeking behaviour within Sudan’s complex state and parastatal machineries, including in the profitable and corruption-prone oil sector.
With this assistance, Hamdok will be better able to navigate Sudan’s opaque financial systems and assess how he might take control of revenue streams that, legally, should be under the state’s purview and not under that of politically connected individuals with ties to the security services.
Hamdok initially may decide to move cautiously even with these tools at his disposal, however, lest he provoke a sharp reaction from actors within the security services who could see their interests threatened.

External actors should also consider how they can best use their diplomatic muscle in support of a successful transition to long-term civilian rule.
Experience with transitions elsewhere suggests that power sharing often founders when there is no party capable of offering an avenue for mediation if protagonists become deadlocked.

The AU might be able to help on this front.
It could appoint a special envoy to Sudan and expand its liaison office in Khartoum with the objective of providing mediation and other support to the transition; the UN could channel technical assistance through this office.
The proposed envoy could report to the AU chair and provide regular briefings to the Peace and Security Council, so that the Council can monitor the agreement’s implementation.
Having an AU representative in this role might bolster the opposition coalition’s confidence that they are not politically alone when they need to square off against the generals, who enjoy an asymmetric edge in military and economic power.
Finally, Sudan’s Western allies – especially the U.S. – should continue to give the transition a diplomatic boost by leaning on the generals’ most important external backers in Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Cairo, so that the latter governments encourage the security forces’ leadership not to obstruct necessary economic and political reforms.
The core message addressed to them should reprise the considerations that finally drove them to push for a power-sharing agreement this summer: without these changes, the political stability that all three seek for Khartoum will likely remain elusive.

The fall of Bashir presents a rare opportunity to end Sudan’s long-running internal wars.
The new constitutional charter requires that transitional authorities prioritise the pursuit of a "just and comprehensive peace" within the first six months of the transition.
Sudanese authorities should use this period to urgently address this challenge.
Western, African and Gulf powers should throw their weight behind this effort.

First, the transitional government and rebel groups should swiftly proclaim a mutual ceasefire during the six-month timeframe allocated for striking peace deals.
If the parties can reach a permanent ceasefire agreement, a formal African-led ceasefire monitoring mission, under the office of the proposed AU envoy, should then be deployed to bolster security on the ground.
The government and rebel groups should also agree to open areas they control to humanitarian agencies and negotiate a mutual release of prisoners as they enter political talks.

Secondly, leaders from the regions that have suffered from wars with Bashir’s regime or their nominees should be offered positions in transitional institutions, lest they conclude that yet another betrayal is in the offing.
The two most powerful rebel leaders – Abdelaziz al-Hilu and Abdul-Wahid al-Nur of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North and the Sudan Liberation Movement, respectively – are unlikely to quickly join the government.
Nur, in particular, has already denounced the new government in Khartoum.
Sudan’s new civilian administration should nonetheless take care to avoid the perception of exclusion.
In making key appointments, it is essential for the prime minister, who himself hails from Kordofan, to include qualified candidates from rebel strongholds.

Thirdly, the transitional government will need to negotiate inclusive peace accords without succumbing to the temptation of further splintering the rebels, which would increase the likelihood of continued war by making peace negotiations even more complex.
These groups will present demands for greater regional autonomy and a more formal redistribution of power; both the security establishment and the opposition coalition should take these seriously, as those demands have strong grassroots support in peripheral areas.
These are concessions that the new authorities will probably need to make in order to start Sudan on its steep path to recovery.
Down the road, it will be necessary to consider how political commitments to greater autonomy translate into the country’s formal federal structure, and how to screen the rebels and integrate their forces into the nation’s security architecture.

Dealing with the splintered Darfuri factions may require a special effort, not least because of the rise of Hemedti, whose RSF now controls most of the region and is loathed by many Darfuris.
Most of the active Darfuri rebel groups are now outside the country, primarily in Libya, where they fight on multiple sides of that nation’s conflict.
Sudanese authorities should urge these groups to engage seriously in the talks.
The AU and EU should offer technical support for the initiative to help parties formulate a roadmap for sustainable peace.

Bashir’s fall is a victory for Sudan’s people and a chance to end Sudan’s legacy of state failure and civil strife.
Yet the path ahead is strewn with challenges and there is hard work ahead to make the transitional power-sharing agreement hold.
The Sudanese people, whose bravery brought down the strongman, will necessarily be at the vanguard of efforts to ensure that all parties abide by their commitments.
External support – particularly to pull Sudan’s economy out of its doldrums and to strengthen the hand of civilians in an uneasy power-sharing arrangement with generals who have an interest in sabotaging reform – is sorely needed.
Sudan’s elites will also need to seize the opportunity to stop the country’s numerous wars and redress the structural inequalities that undergird them.
Bashir’s rule broke Sudan; there will be no shortcuts to repairing the decades of damage wrought.
At least, albeit at great cost, the Sudanese have given themselves a fighting chance.

Khartoum/Addis Ababa/Nairobi/Abu Dhabi/Brussels, 21 October 2019






FFC Forces for Freedom and Change

NCP National Congress Party

NISS National Intelligence and Security Service

RSF Rapid Support Forces

SPA Sudanese Professionals Association

SST State Sponsor of Terrorism designation



####
document number 9: 
Arab Spring




The Arab Spring was a series of pro-democracy uprisings that enveloped several largely Muslim countries, including Tunisia, Morocco, Syria, Libya, Egypt and Bahrain.
The events in these nations generally began in the spring of 2011, which led to the name.
However, the political and social impact of these popular uprisings remains significant today, years after many of them ended.

What Is the Arab Spring?


The Arab Spring was a loosely related group of protests that ultimately resulted in regime changes in countries such as Tunisia, Egypt and Libya.
Not all of the movements, however, could be deemed successful—at least if the end goal was increased democracy and cultural freedom.

In fact, for many countries enveloped by the revolts of the Arab Spring, the period since has been hallmarked by increased instability and oppression.

Given the significant impact of the Arab Spring throughout northern Africa and the Middle East, it’s easy to forget the series of large-scale political and social movements arguably began with a single act of defiance.

Jasmine Revolution


The Arab Spring began in December 2010 when Tunisian street vendor Mohammed Bouazizi set himself on fire to protest the arbitrary seizing of his vegetable stand by police over failure to obtain a permit.

Bouazizi’s sacrificial act served as a catalyst for the so-called Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia.

The street protests that ensued in Tunis, the country’s capital, eventually prompted authoritarian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali to abdicate his position and flee to Saudi Arabia.
He had ruled the country with an iron fist for more than 20 years.

Activists in other countries in the region were inspired by the regime change in Tunisia—the country’s first democratic parliamentary elections were held in October 2011—and began to protest similar authoritarian governments in their own nations.

The participants in these grassroots movements sought increased social freedoms and greater participation in the political process.
Notably, this includes the Tahrir Square uprisings in Cairo, Egypt and similar protests in Bahrain.

However, in some cases, these protests morphed into full-scale civil wars, as evidenced in countries such as Libya, Syria and Yemen.

Why The Name ‘Arab Spring’?


The name "Arab Spring" is a reference to the Revolutions of 1848—also known as the "People’s Spring"—when political upheavals swept Europe.
Ever since, "spring" has been used to describe movements toward democracy like Czechoslovakia’s 1968 "Prague Spring."
Western media began popularizing the term "Arab Spring" in 2011.

Arab Spring Aftermath


While the uprising in Tunisia led to some improvements in the country from a human-rights perspective, not all of the nations that witnessed such social and political upheaval in the spring of 2011 changed for the better.

Most notably, in Egypt, where early changes arising from the Arab Spring gave many hope after the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak, authoritarian rule has apparently returned.
Following the controversial election of Mohamed Morsi in 2012, a coup led by defense minister Abdel Fattah el-Sisi installed the latter as president in 2013, and he remains in power today.

Muammar Gaddafi


In Libya, meanwhile, authoritarian dictator Colonel Muammar Qaddafi was overthrown in October 2011, during a violent civil war, and he was tortured (literally dragged through the streets) and executed by opposition fighters.
Video footage of his death was seen by millions online.

WATCH: 8 Controversial Moments When Smartphones Changed The World

However, since Qaddafi’s downfall, Libya has remained in a state of civil war, and two opposing governments effectively rule separate regions of the country.
Libya’s civilian population has suffered significantly during the years of political upheaval, with violence in the streets and access to food, resources and healthcare services severely limited.

This has contributed, in part, to the ongoing worldwide refugee crisis, which has seen thousands flee Libya, most often by boat across the Mediterranean Sea, with hopes of new opportunities in Europe.

Bashar al Assad


Similarly, the civil war in Syria that began in the aftermath of the Arab Spring lasted for several years, forcing many to leave the country to seek refuge in Turkey, Greece and throughout Western Europe.
For a time, the militant group ISIS had declared a caliphate—a nation governed by Islamic law—in northeastern Syria.

The group executed thousands of people, and many others fled the region in fear of their lives.

Yet, although ISIS has largely been defeated in Syria, the oppressive regime of long-time dictator Bashar al Assad remains in power in the country.

In addition, the ongoing civil war in Yemen can also be traced to the Arab Spring.
The country’s infrastructure has suffered significant damage, and the conflict has devolved into tribal warfare.

And in Bahrain, peaceful pro-democracy protests in the capital Manama in 2011 and 2012 were violently suppressed by the government of King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa.
Officially, the country has a constitutional monarchy form of government, but personal freedoms remain limited.

The plight of the Bahraini people was dramatically portrayed in the documentary

Shouting in the Dark

, which was released in 2012.

Arab Spring Timeline


Here are the key events in the Arab Spring, in chronological order:

December 17, 2010: Mohamed Bouazizi sets himself on fire outside a local government office in an act of protest after being arrested by police for not having a permit to run a vegetable stall.
Street protests begin soon after his death throughout the country.

January 14, 2011: Tunisian president Zine El Abidine Ben Ali resigns and flees to Saudi Arabia.

January 25, 2011: The first coordinated mass protests are held in Tahrir Square in Cairo, Egypt.

February 2011: Protestors in several predominantly Muslim countries stage "Days of Rage" to oppose authoritarian governments and push for democratic reforms.

February 11, 2011: Egypt’s Mubarak steps down.

March 15, 2011: Pro-democracy protests begin in Syria.

May 22, 2011: Police beat thousands of pro-democracy protesters in Morocco.

July 1, 2011: Moroccan voters approve constitutional changes that limit the power of the country’s monarchy.

August 20, 2011: Rebels in Libya launch battle to take control of Tripoli.

September 23, 2011: Yemenis hold a "Million Man March," a large-scale pro-democracy protest.

October 20, 2011: Libyan dictator Colonel Muammar Qaddafi is captured by rebels, tortured and killed.

October 23, 2011: Tunisia holds first democratic parliamentary elections.

November 23, 2011: Yemen dictator Ali Abdullah Saleh signs a power-sharing agreement.
He resigns altogether in February 2012 and is later killed, in 2017, while the country is still engulfed in a civil war.

November 28, 2011: Egypt holds first democratic elections for parliament.
In June 2012, Morsi is elected president, but is removed from power by coup in July 2013.

Sources


Arab Uprisings.
BBC News.
The Arab Spring: The Uprising and Its Significance.
Trinity University.
The Arab Spring: A Year of Revolution.
NPR.
The Arab Spring: Five Years On: Amnesty International.
The Arab Spring: Six Years Later.
Huffington Post.
Bahrain: Shouting in the Dark.
Al Jazeera.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad: Facing down rebellion.
BBC.
Timeline: Arab Spring.
Al Jazeera.



####
document number 10: 
The African Wild West: Nigerian military raid kills 89 terrorists, frees cattle and hostages


Photo of Nigerian troops: DVIDS, Cattle and Motorcycles seized in raid: Nigerian Army


The Nigerian military conducted a large anti-terrorist raid on Friday.
During the raid it killed 89 suspected gunmen and cattle rustlers, while recovering large amounts of arms and ammunition, the Nigerian military said in a statement.

Major General John Enenche, the spokesman for the Nigerian military, added that five hostages, including three women and two men, were rescued during the operation in the Zurmi region of the northwestern Zamfara state.

Enenche said that the Nigerian forces were supported by two helicopter gunships as well as by military forces from the neighboring country of Niger.
"Additionally, 322 rustled cows, 77 motorcycles, and some nine cell phones were recovered from the gunmen," Enenche added.

Enenche said in a comment, with echoes of the times of Judge Roy Bean, that the government was trying to reunite the hostages with their families and the cattle with their rightful owners.

aperture":"0","credit":"Steve Balestrieri","camera":"","caption":"","created_timestamp":"1587900597","copyright":"","focal_length":"0","iso":"0","shutter_speed":"0","title":"","orientation":"0"}" data-image-title="Nigerian rustled cattle" data-large-file="https://i1.wp.com/cms.sofrep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Nigerian-rustled-cattle.jpg?fit=624%2C411=1" data-medium-file="https://i1.wp.com/cms.sofrep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Nigerian-rustled-cattle.jpg?fit=300%2C198=1" data-orig-file="https://i1.wp.com/cms.sofrep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Nigerian-rustled-cattle.jpg?fit=624%2C411=1" data-orig-size="624,411" data-permalink="https://sofrep.com/news/the-african-wild-west-nigerian-military-raid-kills-89-terrorists-frees-cattle-and-hostages/nigerian-rustled-cattle/" data-recalc-dims="1" data-was-processed="true" sizes="(max-width: 450px) 100vw, 450px" src="https://i1.wp.com/cms.sofrep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Nigerian-rustled-cattle.jpg?w=624=1" srcset="https://i1.wp.com/cms.sofrep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Nigerian-rustled-cattle.jpg?resize=300%2C198=1 300w, https://i1.wp.com/cms.sofrep.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Nigerian-rustled-cattle.jpg?w=624=1 624w">

Rustled cattle are recovered by Nigerian troops after a raid.
(Nigerian military)



####
document number 11: 
Turkey's troops cross over into Syria's Afrin



Turkey's prime minister says ground troops have crossed into the Syrian enclave of Afrin as part of an operation against Syrian Kurdish armed group YPG.

In a press conference in Istanbul on Sunday, Binali Yildirim said Turkish forces crossed into the YPG-controlled region in Syria at 08:05 GMT from the Turkish village of Gulbaba.

He said Turkey plans to establish a 30km "safe zone" in Afrin.

Turkey considers Syria's Kurdish Democratic Union Party (PYD) and its armed wing, the YPG, "terrorist groups" with ties to the banned Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which has waged a decades-long fight inside Turkey.

It fears the establishment of a Kurdish corridor along its border.

Turkish news agency Anadolu reported that the Turkish forces were backed by armoured vehicles, special forces and infantry regiments.

They have reportedly advanced 5km inside Afrin.

'In a very short time'


Confirming the Afrin operation, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said on Sunday he hopes it will be completed "in a very short time".

But Erdogan also warned pro-Kurdish opposition supporters in Turkey not to protest against the military's operation.

"Know that if you go out on the streets, authorities are on your necks," he told thousands of supporters in Bursa.

Earlier, Anadolu reported that Turkish-backed Free Syrian Army (FSA) fighters had advanced towards Afrin in the early hours of Sunday.

The YPG confirmed the advance, saying two villages in Afrin's Bilbil district near the Turkish border came under attack.

About 25,000 Free Syrian Army (FSA) rebels were joining the Turkish military operation in northern Syria with the goal of recapturing Arab towns and villages held by the YPG, a Syrian rebel commander told Reuters news agency on Sunday.

Major Yasser Abdul Rahim, who is also the commander of Failaq al-Sham, a main FSA rebel group in the operations room of the campaign, said the rebels did not seek to enter the mainly Kurdish city of Afrin but encircle it and expel the YPG.

"We have no interest in entering the city only the military targets inside the city and the villages around it.
We aim to encircle the city and ensure the militias are evicted.
We won't fight in the city as we have no problem with civilians," he said.

A main goal of the military operation was to recapture Tel Rifaat, a town southeast of Afrin, and a string of Arab villages the YPG captured from rebels in February 2016, driving out tens of thousands of inhabitants, Abdul Rahim said.

"The task of the Free Syrian Army is first to regain sixteen Arab towns and villages occupied by the foreign militias [YPG] with the help of the Russian air force," Abdul Rahim told Reuters in a phone interview from inside Syria.

The fighting Abdul Rahim was referring to forced at least 150,000 residents of these villages to flee to Azaz.

They are sheltering in camps at the Turkish border and rebels say they have not been allowed to go back to their homes.

Rebels mobilised


As early as Friday, thousands of FSA fighters had already been mobilised in Turkey's Hatay province and Syrian locations east of Afrin.

Turkey's military said on Sunday it targeted at least 153 "shelters, hideouts and ammunition depots" of the Kurdish armed groups, as well as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) group in several areas.

But the YPG said that civilian areas were also hit, including Afrin's city centre.

Meanwhile, three rockets have been reportedly fired from Syria, hitting four locations in two neighbourhoods in the Turkish province of Kilis.

Anadolu quoted Mehmet Tekinarslan, governor of Kilis, as saying that three people were injured in the attack.



Smoke rises from Syria's Afrin region following the Turkish operation on Saturday [Reuters]




Turkey's military has been hard-pressed to emphasise that "only terrorists" are being targeted in its latest operation.

On Saturday, Erdogan said the operation in Afrin would be followed by a push in the northern town of Manbij, which the US-backed Kurdish forces captured from ISIL in 2016.

The US has previously armed the Syrian Kurdish YPG, viewing it as the most effective ground force in its fight against the ISIL armed group.

According to estimates, there are between 8,000 to 10,000 Kurdish fighters in the Afrin area.

Al Jazeera's Stefanie Dekker, reporting near the Syria-Turkey border, said the military and logistical build-up at the border continues.

She also reported hearing intensive shellings, heaving machine gun fire and jets flying over.

Russia, which controls the airspace over Afrin, has withdrawn hundreds of its soldiers deployed near the city before Saturday's operation.







####
document number 12: 
US developing bioweapons in secret lab in Georgia: Russia



Russia has called on the United States to explain experiments with biological and chemical weapons in Georgia, with various Russian officials warning Washington that Moscow won’t tolerate such trials near its borders.

Major General Igor Kirillov, Chief of Russia’s Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Protection Troops, revealed during an interview with the state news agency TASS on Thursday that the US was running a secret chemical weapons lab at the Richard Lugar Public Health Research Center, located in the Georgian settlement of Alekseyevka.

"It raises a question - ‘Why such documents are stored at the Lugar Public Health Research Center?’
We expect a clear-cut answer to this question from the Georgian and American sides," Kirillov said.

He said a list of patents showed the US had developed various types of munitions intended for delivering chemical and biological agents.

According to these patents, the munitions had "low destruction cost" and didn’t "need to contact with enemy manpower."

"This corresponds to the concept of ‘non-contact warfare,’ the United States is implementing," he said, referring to the evolving military concept of fighting wars while ensuring minimum physical contact of own forces.

Kirillov said the patents indicated possible plans by the US military to develop specific capsules that could be filled with poisonous, radioactive, narcotic substances as well as with infectious disease pathogens.

"These munitions are not related to the list of conventional armaments and humane tools of warfare, while the publication of this information contradicts international accords on the prohibition of biological weapons," Kirillov added.

The official said the Georgia center was part of a network of such weapons labs the US had established near the borders of Russia and China.

Kirillov went on to accuse the US of testing deadly drugs and highly lethal biological agents on patients at the Lugar Center under the guise of medical research.

In one case, he said, over 70 people lost their lives after they were given the drug Solvadi, manufactured by the US-based Gilead Sciences, in which former US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld is a key shareholder.

"Even during widespread epidemics at in-patient infection clinics, such a large number of lethal cases has never been recorded," the general said.
He said the same medication was approved by Russia and "not a single lethal case was recorded during its clinical testing."

Vladimir Shamanov, the Head of Russia’s State Duma (Lower House of Parliament) Defense Committee, said Moscow was going to take all the necessary political and military steps in response to the experiments.

"We cannot just turn a blind eye, knowing that something, which directly affects security on the southern borders, is happening there.
We will take diplomatic and military measures," he confirmed.

Vladimir Yermakov, Director of the Russian Foreign Ministry’s Non-Proliferation and Arms Control Department, took a similar line, telling reporters that Moscow had already raised the issue with Washington.

"We told [the Americans] that we won’t let your military biologists do something strange on the Russian border," Yermakov said.

ME

Tags



####
document number 13: 
Turkey Begins Invasion of Syria, Targeting US-Allied Kurds


NATO member Turkey's military has begun an invasion of areas of northeastern Syria evacuated by U.S. troops, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Wednesday.
The operation is aimed at mostly-Kurdish forces partnered with the U.S.

In a tweet, Erdogan said his military "just launched Operation Peace Spring against PKK/YPG and Daesh terrorists in northern Syria."

"Our mission is to prevent the creation of a terror corridor across our southern border, and to bring peace to the area," Erdogan added.

The main fighting force of the U.S.-allied Syrian Democratic Forces is the YPG (People's Protection Units).
Erdogan claims that the YPG has links to the PKK (Kurdistan Workers Party), a group in eastern Turkey labeled a terrorist organization by Turkey and the U.S.

Daesh is an Arabic acronym for the Islamic State, or ISIS.

Earlier, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that there had been shelling around the northeastern Syrian border town of Ras al-Ayn.

Turkey's military operation has faced open opposition from the U.S. military, which on Monday announced that Turkey had been cut off from access to the Combined Air Operations Center (CAOC), depriving Turkey's air forces of surveillance intelligence.

However, an Oct.
6 White House announcement, followed by a series of Tweets from President Donald Trump, stated that the estimated 50 U.S. troops in northeastern Syria were being withdrawn to avoid the potential for a clash with the invading Turks.

Trump also restated his intention to withdraw all of the estimated 1,000 U.S. troops remaining in Syria, but gave no timeline.

The SDF has described the U.S. withdrawal as a "stab in the back" to a loyal ally that suffered an estimated 11,000 casualties in the long campaign that drove ISIS from its last territorial strongholds.

In statements, the SDF also vowed to "defend our land at all costs."

CNN reported from the scene in northeastern Syria that civilians were clogging roads as they fled south to avoid Turkish airstrikes.

From the Turkish town of Akcakale on the Syrian border, across from the flashpoint Syrian town of Tal Abyad, the Associated Press reported that the Turkish airstrikes were hitting Ras al-Ayn.

Akcakale had previously been the site of a joint operations center for U.S. and Turkish troops in coordinating joint air and ground patrols in northeastern Syria, an effort to ease Turkish concerns about the presence of the SDF.

Only last week, Defense Secretary Mark Esper referred to Akcakale in remarks to reporters traveling with him and expressed his hopes for the continuation of the joint patrols.

The Defense Department had also posted photos of SDF fighters withdrawing from the area and dismantling fortifications.

Before Erdogan's announcement, Trump sent out a tweet restating his position that the U.S. had become bogged down at immense cost in pointless and never-ending wars in the Mideast, and U.S. troops should be brought home.

"Fighting between various groups that has been going on for hundreds of years," Trump said.
"USA should never have been in Middle East.
Moved our 50 soldiers out.
Turkey MUST take over captured ISIS fighters that Europe refused to have returned.
The stupid endless wars, for us, are ending!"

Trump's order to withdraw U.S. troops has faced harsh criticism from his closest Republican allies in Congress, including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky, and from retired military officers who have normally been supportive.

On Fox News Tuesday night, retired Army Gen.
Jack Keane, the former Army vice chief of staff, said that the U.S. essentially clearing the way for a Turkish invasion was "a recipe for disaster."

Trump has threatened to "obliterate" Turkey's economy unless the Turkish military uses restraint but Keane said "I don't know any military incursion that wouldn't do harm."

One of the main fears expressed by critics of the withdrawal is that the SDF would abandon the camps where they guard thousands of captured ISIS prisoners.
The SDF fighters "are not going to stay guarding detainees" as they turn to face the Turks, Keane said.

In his tweet announcement, Erdogan said the Turkish military was joined by the Syrian National Army, formerly known as the Free Syrian Army, an irregular force once backed and supplied by the U.S. before splitting with the SDF.

Erdogan has also previously made clear that one of the main objectives of a Turkish invasion would be to create a "safe zone" 20 miles deep and 300 miles wide east of the Euphrates River stretching to the Iraqi border where about two million Syrian refugees now in Turkey could be sent.

-- Richard Sisk can be reached at richard.sisk@military.com.


© Copyright 2020 Military.com.
All rights reserved.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.



####
document number 14: 
25 Killed in U.S. Airstrikes in Iraq and Syria, Iran-Backed Militia Says


(BAGHDAD) — An Iranian-backed militia said Monday that the death toll from U.S. military strikes in Iraq and Syria against its fighters has risen to 25, vowing to exact revenge for the "aggression of evil American ravens."

The announcement in Baghdad came a day after U.S. Defense Secretary Mark Esper said Washington had carried out military strikes targeting the Iranian-backed Iraqi militia blamed for a rocket attack that killed an American contractor in Iraq last week.

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from time.com, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 15: 
India, China to resolve border dispute ‘peacefully’


China and India says they have agreed to "peacefully resolve" their border dispute.
(Shutterstock image)



Current Standoff confined to 5 areas of traditional differences for years




NEW DELHI: In a significant attempt to defuse escalating tensions along the border, both New Delhi and Beijing have agreed to "peacefully resolve" the dispute between the world’s two most populous nations, India’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement released on Sunday.

"Both sides agreed to peacefully resolve the situation in the border areas in accordance with various bilateral agreements," excerpts from the statement said.

The agreement comes a day after military officials from the two nations held high-level talks near the eastern part of the Himalayan region of Ladakh.
This disputed border area was the center of the current escalation between the two neighbors.

The talks on Saturday, at the behest of India, were held at the Border Personnel Meeting Point in Maldo on the Chinese side of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in Eastern Ladakh.

"This year marked the 70th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries, and both sides agreed that an early resolution would contribute to the further development of that relationship," Indian officials said.

The issue began early last month when Indian troops blamed China’s military for hindering usual patrolling at the LAC, along the Ladakh and Sikkim border.

Beijing blamed its southern neighbor for building road infrastructure at the Fingers region around the Pangong Tso Lake and Galwan Valley in eastern Ladakh.

Map showing the volatile borders of China, India and Pakistan.
(Shutterstock image)


The present standoff, which began with border skirmishes, is confined to those five key areas where India and China have had traditional differences on the perception of the LAC in the Ladakh region.

Both sides adopted a firm approach and, according to media reports, China deployed nearly 2,500 extra troops in the region, in addition to enhancing its weaponry and military infrastructure.

On Tuesday, India’s Minister of Defense Rajnath Singh hinted at the build-up of Indian troops in the disputed area, too.

"It is true that people of China are on the border.
They claim that it is their territory.
We claim that it is ours.
There has been a disagreement over it.
A sizeable number of Chinese people have come there.
India has done what it needed to do," Singh said in a media interaction on Tuesday.

However, on Sunday, India said that the "two sides would continue military and diplomatic engagements to resolve the situation and to ensure peace and tranquility in the border areas."

Foreign policy experts, for their part, said that the de-escalation and resolution of disputes were "important to maintain a good bilateral relationship."

"If we don’t address the contentious issue it will spill over and impact other bilateral and multilateral relationships," Professor Srikanth Kondapalli of the New Delhi-based Jawaharlal University told Arab News.

He reasoned that the stand-off in Ladakh is related to the "conflicting claims on sovereignty and each country’s distinct strategic vision."

"If China occupies the region, it can connect to Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Central Asia and influence the future setup in Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir," he said, adding that "Ladakh holds geostrategic importance for India" also.

"This region is the highest region on earth, and those who control the peak control the valley.
That is another strategic reason for the dispute."

Manoj Kewalramani, a fellow at the Bangalore-based think-tank Takshashila Institution, added that Saturday’s agreement does not mean a "de-escalation or disengagement anytime soon" or the cessation of dispute.

"The nature of the boundary dispute, the ambiguity surrounding claims and the strategic dynamic of the India-China relationship imply that we should continue to expect incidents and volatility," Kewalramani told Arab News.

He added that what was necessary at this juncture was for both sides "to recognize this."

"They have been working on mechanisms of engagement to maintain stability.
The current situation has tactical and strategic components to it.
The tactical component is related to infrastructure development and force posturing.
The strategic component is related to geopolitical shifts amid the pandemic, which entail worsening Sino-US ties and Beijing’s desire to shore up its periphery," he said.

Other experts believe China escalated tensions along the border for other reasons.

"We have to understand the timing of the incident.
The border infrastructure has been going on for some time.
Judging by the way China reacted this time, it was clear that they wanted to divert the attention away from the mess of the pandemic, their stand on Hong Kong sovereignty and their military posturing in the South China Sea," Jagannath P.
Panda of the Institute of Defense Studies and Analysis, a New Delhi-based think tank, told Arab News.

"The Chinese wanted to send a message to the whole world that they are a competent power and can handle multiple issues at one go," he added.



World


World




####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = nuclear meltdown
document number 1: 
The New START Treaty: Signed


President Barack Obama signs the instrument of ratification of the New START Treaty in the Oval Office, Feb.
2, 2011.
Participants include, from left: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen; Energy Secretary Steven Chu; Defense Secretary Robert Gates; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton; Sen.
John Kerry, D-Mass.; Sen.
Richard Lugar, R-Ind.; Sen.
Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif.
; Sen.
Thad Cochran, R-Miss.; Sen.
Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H.; and Vice President Joe Biden.
(Official White House Photo by Chuck Kennedy)


Today the President ratified a landmark nuclear arms treaty with Russia, New START.
As the President said during the end of the last Congress, the treaty is "a national security imperative" as well as "a cornerstone of our relations with Russia" as we continue to work with them on everything from Iran to Afghanistan.
With the Senate having approved the treaty with a strong bipartisan vote late last year, today's signing marks a final step in the process.
That process began when President Obama and President Medvedev initially signed the agreement in Prague last April, a fitting location given that one year before that President Obama had been there for a major speech commiting to seek the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons.

You can read the Treaty (pdf) and Protocol (pdf) themselves, but here's a quick overview from our fact sheet at the time:

Strategic Offensive Reductions: Under the Treaty, the U.S. and Russia will be limited to significantly fewer strategic arms within seven years from the date the Treaty enters into force.
Each Party has the flexibility to determine for itself the structure of its strategic forces within the aggregate limits of the Treaty.
These limits are based on a rigorous analysis conducted by Department of Defense planners in support of the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review.

Aggregate limits:



1,550 warheads.
Warheads on deployed ICBMs and deployed SLBMs count toward this limit and each deployed heavy bomber equipped for nuclear armaments counts as one warhead toward this limit.



This limit is 74% lower than the limit of the 1991 START Treaty and 30% lower than the deployed strategic warhead limit of the 2002 Moscow Treaty.




A combined limit of 800 deployed and non-deployed ICBM launchers, SLBM launchers, and heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments.


A separate limit of 700 deployed ICBMs, deployed SLBMs, and deployed heavy bombers equipped for nuclear armaments.



This limit is less than half the corresponding strategic nuclear delivery vehicle limit of the START Treaty.




Verification and Transparency: The Treaty has a verification regime that combines the appropriate elements of the 1991 START Treaty with new elements tailored to the limitations of the Treaty.
Measures under the Treaty include on-site inspections and exhibitions, data exchanges and notifications related to strategic offensive arms and facilities covered by the Treaty, and provisions to facilitate the use of national technical means for treaty monitoring.
To increase confidence and transparency, the Treaty also provides for the exchange of telemetry.
Treaty Terms: The Treaty’s duration will be ten years, unless superseded by a subsequent agreement.
The Parties may agree to extend the Treaty for a period of no more than five years.
The Treaty includes a withdrawal clause that is standard in arms control agreements.
The 2002 Moscow Treaty terminates upon entry into force of the New START Treaty.
The U.S. Senate and the Russian legislature must approve the Treaty before it can enter into force.
No Constraints on Missile Defense and Conventional Strike: The Treaty does not contain any constraints on testing, development or deployment of current or planned U.S. missile defense programs or current or planned United States long-range conventional strike capabilities.


President Barack Obama's signature on the instrument of ratification of the New START Treaty in the Oval Office, February 2, 2011.
(Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)



####
document number 2: 
PROSPECTing for antineutrinos


Assembly of the PROSPECT neutrino detector.
(Image credit: PROSPECT collaboration/Mara Lavitt)


The Precision Reactor Oscillation and Spectrum Experiment (PROSPECT) has completed the installation of a novel antineutrino detector that will probe the possible existence of a new form of matter.

PROSPECT, located at the High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR) at the Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), has begun taking data to study electron antineutrinos that are emitted from nuclear decays in the reactor to search for so-called sterile neutrinos and to learn about the underlying nuclear reactions that power fission reactors.

Antineutrinos are elusive, elementary particles produced in nuclear beta decay.
The antineutrino is an antimatter particle, the counterpart to the neutrino.

"Neutrinos are among the most abundant particles in the universe," said Yale University physicist Karsten Heeger, principal investigator and co-spokesperson for PROSPECT.
"The discovery of neutrino oscillation has opened a window to physics beyond the Standard Model of Physics.
The study of antineutrinos with PROSPECT allows us to search for a previously unobserved particle, the so-called sterile neutrino, while probing the nuclear processes inside a reactor."

Over the past few years several neutrino experiments at nuclear reactors have detected fewer antineutrinos than scientists had predicted, and the energy of the neutrinos did not match expectations.
This, in combination with earlier anomalous results, led to the hypothesis that a fraction of electron antineutrinos may transform into sterile neutrinos that would have remained undetected in previous experiments.

This hypothesized transformation would take place through a quantum mechanical process called neutrino oscillation.
The first observation of neutrino oscillation amongst known types of neutrinos from the sun and the atmosphere led to the 2015 Nobel Prize in physics.

(Image credit: PROSPECT collaboration/Mara Lavitt)


The installation of PROSPECT follows four years of intensive research and development by a collaboration of more than 60 participants from 10 universities and four national laboratories.

"The development of PROSPECT is based on years of research in the detection of reactor antineutrinos with surface-based detectors, an extremely challenging task because of high backgrounds," said PROSPECT co-spokesperson Pieter Mumm, a scientist at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

The experiment uses a novel antineutrino detector system based on a segmented liquid scintillator detector technology.
The combination of segmentation and a unique, lithium-doped liquid scintillator formulation allows PROSPECT to identify particle types and interaction points.
These design features, along with extensive, tailored shielding, will enable PROSPECT to make a precise measurement of neutrinos in the high-background environment of a nuclear reactor.

PROSPECT’s detector technology also may have applications in the monitoring of nuclear reactors for non-proliferation purposes and the measurement of neutrons from nuclear processes.

"The successful operation of PROSPECT will allow us to gain insight into one of the fundamental puzzles in neutrino physics and develop a better understanding of reactor fuel, while also providing a new tool for nuclear safeguards," said co-spokesperson Nathaniel Bowden, a scientist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and an expert in nuclear non-proliferation technology.

After two years of construction and final assembly at the Yale Wright Laboratory, the PROSPECT detector was transported to HFIR in early 2018.

"The development and construction of PROSPECT has been a significant team effort, making use of the complementary expertise at U.S. national laboratories and universities," said Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri, leader of the Neutrino and Advanced Detectors group in ORNL’s Physics Division.

PROSPECT is the latest in a series of fundamental science experiments located at HFIR.
"We are excited to work with PROSPECT scientists to support their research," said Chris Bryan, who manages experiments at HFIR for ORNL’s Research Reactors Division.

The experiment is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, the Heising-Simons Foundation, and the National Science Foundation.
Additional support comes from Yale University, the Illinois Institute of Technology, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory LDRD program.
The collaboration also benefits from the support and hospitality of the High Flux Isotope Reactor, a DOE Office of Science User Facility, and Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle for the U.S. Department of Energy.

Science Technology



####
document number 3: 
Macron delivers breakthrough on Iran at tense G7 summit, but little else


BIARRITZ, France (Reuters) - French President Emmanuel Macron paved the way at a G7 summit for a diplomatic solution to the standoff between Washington and Tehran over a 2015 nuclear deal, but there was little else to show from a meeting at which allies were sharply divided.


Macron, host of the summit of seven industrialized nations that ended on Monday in the French seaside resort of Biarritz, said that Iranian President Hassan Rouhani had told him he was open to a meeting with U.S. President Donald Trump.

Trump told a news conference before heading home that it was realistic to envisage a meeting with the Iranian head of government in the coming weeks.
Both leaders are scheduled to attend the United Nations General Assembly next month.

European leaders have struggled to calm a confrontation between Iran and the United States since Trump pulled his country out of Iran’s internationally brokered 2015 nuclear deal last year and reimposed sanctions on the Iranian economy.

"What unites us, and that is a big step forward, is that we not only don’t want Iran to have nuclear weapons, but we also (want to) find the solution to that via political means," German Chancellor Angela Merkel said at the end of the gathering.

Macron has led efforts to defuse tensions, fearing a collapse of the nuclear deal could set the Middle East ablaze.

Trump ruled out lifting sanctions but said talks were underway to see how countries could open credit lines to keep its economy afloat.
He indicated he wanted to address the nuclear deal’s timescale and said he did not want regime change.

"I’m looking at a really good Iran, really strong, we’re not looking for regime change," he said.
"And we’re looking to make Iran rich again, let them be rich, let them do well."

But, apparently referring to Iran’s recent rhetoric about its ability to attack U.S. interests, Trump suggested Iran would meet "violent force" if it followed through on its threats.

FEW CONCRETE RESULTS


Despite the headway made on Iran, the meeting ended with few significant deliverables because there were so many issues dividing the United States and its allies in particular.

These ranged from Washington’s escalating trade war with China, which many fear could tip the slowing world economy into recession, how to deal with North Korea’s nuclear ambitions and the question of whether Russian President Vladimir Putin should be readmitted to the group.

The U.S. president up-ended last year’s G7 summit in Canada, walking out of the meeting early and disassociating himself from the final communique having initially endorsed the document.

Trump said he had got on very well in Biarrtiz with fellow leaders from the group that also comprises Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan.

However, Macron decided ahead of the meeting not to try for a communique after last year’s quarrel, and in the end France issued a terse one-page summit statement that mentioned trade, Iran, Libya, Ukraine and Hong Kong.

Trump offered an olive branch to China after days of intense feuding between the world’s two largest economies over trade that has spooked financial markets and worried his G7 allies.

Washington’s dispute with Beijing escalated last week as both sides leveled more tariffs on each other’s exports.

However, on Monday Trump said he believed China wanted to make a trade deal after it contacted U.S. trade officials overnight to say it wanted to return to the negotiating table.


Slideshow (11 Images)

He hailed Chinese President Xi Jinping as a great leader and said the prospect of talks was a very positive development.

Asked about the White House’s apparent flip-flopping, he said: "It’s the way I negotiate."

NO CONSENSUS ON BRINGING RUSSIA BACK


Trump skipped a summit session on climate change at which they agreed to $20 million technical and financial help for Brazil and its neighbors stop the Amazon forest fires.

Macron said Trump agreed on the initiative but could not attend because of bilateral meeting engagements.

A record number of fires are ravaging the rainforest, many of them in Brazil, drawing international concern because of the Amazon’s importance to the global environment.

Macron said there was no consensus on Trump’s proposal to invite Russia back to what used to be the G8.

Moscow was excluded from the group in 2014 after it annexed Ukraine’s Crimea and then backed an anti-Kiev rebellion in the industrial region of Donbas in eastern Ukraine.

Two European officials said that efforts by summit ‘sherpas’ to agree on statements on global cooperation on artificial intelligence and gender equality were blocked by the U.S. delegation in talks that went into Sunday night.

"Let’s say our sessions have been much harder and longer than previously thought because one delegation blatantly blocked almost everything, showing little will to really negotiate and move forward," said a senior European diplomat, who declined to be named.

U.S. officials were not available to comment on the impasse.





####
document number 4: 
&amp;lt; U.S. And Russia Have Just Over A Year To Deal With An Expiring Nuclear Treaty


MARY LOUISE KELLY, HOST:

The topic of arms control came up this week in a phone call between President Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
The U.S. and Russia have just over one year to deal with an expiring nuclear treaty.
Trump wants to expand that treaty.
He wants China to join.

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: I spoke to China about it.
They - during one of our trade negotiations, they were extremely excited about getting involved in that.

KELLY: Now, skeptics worry that going big could risk upending the existing treaty with Russia.
Here to talk about this is NPR White House correspondent Franco Ordoñez.
Hey there.

FRANCO ORDOÑEZ, BYLINE: Hi.

KELLY: So this is the New START treaty - that's the formal name.
Why does President Trump want to make it bigger?

ORDOÑEZ: Well, he is concerned that Russia has been able to build up its nuclear arsenal despite that agreement, particularly when it comes to shorter-range nuclear weapons that are outside the scope of the treaty.
Meanwhile, there's China, which is investing heavily in its own nuclear weapons.
And while it doesn't have nearly as many weapons, the U.S. officials warn that China's been doing more testing than the rest of the world combined.

A senior administration official told me this week that President Trump has directed them to think more broadly, both in terms of including China but also on what is covered.
And the official didn't rule out just extending the current deal with Russia.

KELLY: It sounds like a lot in play, which leads me to ask you about the timing here.
They've got one year before it expires, and this is an election year in the U.S., so the president has a lot on his plate already.
Are their concerns about that, of being able to get this done?

ORDOÑEZ: Well, not according to the person who has been running point on this at the White House until recently - that'd be Tim Morrison, who led Russia issues at the National Security Council.
You'll remember that he resigned in October after testifying in the impeachment inquiry.

KELLY: I do.

ORDOÑEZ: He told me renewing can be done quickly, and there's no reason to rush when there's an opportunity now to bring Russia and China to the table.

TIM MORRISON: It's sort of like people who have a car lease.
Nobody goes back to the dealer a year ahead of time and says, hey, can I give you my money now to extend the lease?
No, they're going to give themselves the margin to go back and say, well, maybe there will be a better deal over the course of the next year.

ORDOÑEZ: To do otherwise, he says, is only playing into the interests of Russia, who is happy with the status quo, and China, who wants to keep building weapons.

KELLY: If China wants to keep building weapons, is China open to President Trump's vision for this?
Do they want to join?

ORDOÑEZ: Well, there's little sign of that based on their public statements, and that's what worries people like Daryl Kimball of the Arms Control Association.
He said it would be foreign policy malpractice to allow the current deal with Russia to lapse, and there isn't enough time to negotiate a new one.

DARYL KIMBALL: If that treaty is allowed to expire in 2021, there will be no legally binding limits on the world's two largest nuclear arsenals, the U.S. and Russia, for the first time in five decades.

ORDOÑEZ: He argues it's more realistic for the U.S. and Russia to sign in an extension and then begin new talks with China.

KELLY: So how do we square that with what we heard from President Trump at the very beginning, that he sounded very confident - said they're all in; they want to get this done?

ORDOÑEZ: Yeah.
I mean, Trump often boasts that the other side is eager to make a deal with him.
That includes China, Iran and the Taliban.
And that's another reason to be cautious about pushing this too far, says Molly Montgomery, a former career foreign service officer who worked on arms control in the Trump White House.

MOLLY MONTGOMERY: What we've seen time and time again is that the president is, shall we say, overly optimistic about other countries' willingness to sign on to the deals that he is proposing.

ORDOÑEZ: She told me the Russians are interested in renewing now, but there's no guarantee in 13 months that they will still be.
And things can get complicated quickly, especially given the fraught nature of U.S. relations with Russia.

KELLY: Indeed.
NPR White House correspondent Franco Ordoñez with the latest there on the fate of the last remaining U.S.-Russia nuclear treaty.
Thanks, Franco.

ORDOÑEZ: Thank you.

(SOUNDBITE OF HAKAISU'S "SETTLING IN")

Copyright © 2020 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 5: 
Day 10.


Most blog’s start on day one — not mine though, mine starts from when my brain shuts down and I no longer know what to do except to just write down my thoughts.

In a first world country, self isolation may often mean people are home alone — completely alone…maybe with a pet, or a partner.
But it’s usually one person, or people in pairs — when we come a little closer to home, in our own country, the concept of nuclear families is extremely new and raw and uncommon.
Lock down, is not you and me and our dog, self isolation is not you work from home in your room while I watch tv in the hall, and we kiss every few hours.
No, nuclear families in India, are far from the reality.

Lock down’s in indian families consists of husband, wife, their two kids, the husband’s parents, his single sister, or his brother and his wife — all stuck under the same roof of a 3 bedroom hall kitchen.

And this is the privilaed lot.
A lot of you might even be in a 1 bhk with your parents and your sibling.
Some have it better, others worse, and some… you don’t even want to think about.

But this concept of "nana nani are in the old age home, and parents are living in their own house an hour away, and you and your partner are under lock down in your own house"… is not a reality.
Netflix and chill, is not every average person’s life in India.

You are probably under lock down with the same 70 year old grandparent that’s at the highest risk, and oh the irony.

Similarly, so am I.
Even though I am usually part of the nuclear family lifestyle because people in my family are scattered all over the world.
Mum lives in Australia, brother in Spain, i’m in India…

All of that changed last month when my family (mum and nani) decided to come visit us from Australia… for a few weeks.
I was really exicted about seeing them, about them seeing my new house — Rahul and I moved in last year and this home is our first place together, i’d decorated the entire house myself and coudn’t wait to show it off to my ladies… the next few weeks were going to be so much fun, I thought to myself.

Then the virus started to spread over China, Iran, Europe, US… Making the news every few hours, and the more we found out about it, the scarier it became.
India was still taking it slow, being really chilled out about it.
I remember all my friends celebrating Holi, my producers ready to start our new project in north india for a month — people in the country thought this wouldnt affect them.
People thought a few forward messages about haldi and tulsi, and us Indian’s would dodge Covid-19.

While the rest of you were chilling and thinking that the virus was just a great lunch time conversation at the office — we decided to self isolate ourselves from the rest of the world — because my grandmother is 84, and has a pace maker, so going on about our day just because the government hadn’t asked us to lock down just wasnt good enough — we couldnt possibly risk her life, not when we knew exactly what was happening in other parts of the world.
So we started working from home, and told everybody we knew that they weren’t allowed to come over anymore — we had locked our own selves down.

When we started, back on the 13th, I don’t think we knew really well what we were doing, or what we were getting ourselves into — If i’m going to be honest, I don’t think I still entirely know what’s going on… I love my family to bits and pieces, but never in my wildest dreams did I think i’d be stuck under lockdown in a two bedroom apartment with my boyfriend, my mother, and my grandmother.
I bet neither did they.

We haven’t seen another face, or even the inside of our lift, in 9 days.
I don’t know if you know yet what that can do to you… to the people around you, regardless of the love you hold for each other, it changes something — I don’t know if you know yet, but we will talk in a week’s time.

As I type this, the news channel on the TV shows that section 144 just turned into a curfew — obviously makes very little difference in my life given that I no longer know what day of the week it is… but hey, good luck to you lol, wecome aboard?
:)

PS: I was very confused about the difference between Section 144 and Curfew, so i’m attaching a link that I just read, it helped me understand what sort of restrictions we are under and might help you too.

https://www.youthkiawaaz.com/2020/02/section-144-and-curfew-explained/

Welcome to lock down, all I can say is stay safe, wash your hands, don’t forward fake whats app forwards (verify first) and make the most of your days at home…

Share.
Drop a comment.
Let them know we’re all in this together.



####
document number 6: 
Military analysis of the American cruise missile attack on Syria



US fires Tomahawk cruise missiles into Syria in retaliation ... - hindustantimes.com


The military aspects of the attack can be termed a limited success.
It is now confirmed that only 23 cruise missiles hit the target.
One reason for this could be that only certain areas were targeted where there were no Russians.
Syria itself is a puny power, and the attack met with no resistance.
But in future, the Russians could give anti-ship missiles to Syria to bolster their defense.
In such a scenario a couple of anti-ship missiles fired and hitting the US destroyers could lead to over 1500 deaths.
This would set the stage for a confrontation with Russia.
An escalation would then be a certainty.

The threat by the US to launch more missile attacks show that Trump has for the moment, shelved the battle against the ISIS.
This was expected as the President is an impetuous man with little experience.

Surrender to Hawks


There are many hawks led by Senator McCain and his ilk who have hailed the airstrike on the Syrian airfield.
They have asked for more attacks, and now the US says that no peace is possible in Syria without the removal of Assad.
With the Russians and Iranians backing Assad, the stage is set for a confrontation.
War is an extension of the political aim.
Keeping this in mind, the attack by Trump is, in reality, an attack on Russia.
Despite all talk, it is clear that the target is Russia and its support for Assad.

The attack


The attack itself did a lot of damage.

But to completely degrade the airfield for operations, more attacks will be needed.
The Syrian aircraft took off again in just a few hours after the assault to bomb the ISIS targets.
In case the US were to follow up with further attacks, the chance of an escalation are bright.
There will be a reaction as per Newton's laws of motion.

Every action has a reaction.
The US forces in Syria will now be at greater risk.
The attack without waiting for an independent confirmation as to who uses the gas weapons is reminiscent of the build-up to the invasion of Iraq and Vietnam.
Similarly, at that time the US Presidents upped the ante leading to thousands of American young men being killed.

The objectives were not achieved.

The attack has opened a Pandora's box, and Trump cannot back off, as it would be a loss of face.
He has to shift the focus away from fighting the ISIS to Assad and Russia.
In such a scenario if the US destroyers are hit a nuclear conflagration cannot be ruled out.
Obama now appears a much saner president than Trump who is chasing glory as a "great president."
He may well end up as the man who started the nuclear war.



####
document number 7: 
How was the Chernobyl and Pripyat evacuation ?


Those who knew the distribution of radioactive substances, hastened to leave the infected area on their own in the morning, but it was not very successful.

chernobyl evacuation footage


• There were no mobile phones at that time.
Telephones were not installed at all, but they also had a problem, the telephone connection did not work.
And not only in the zone of defeat, there was no connection with Kiev.
Most of the population, especially the male, was involved in the liquidation of the consequences and was at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
Call home and say that you need to leave could not.
• Low information content of the population.
Neither one really knew the extent to which pollution occurred.
Of course, this was the era of atomic research, but they did not keep their own dosimeters.
• Everyone until the last hoped for a positive outcome of events.

Evacuation of Chernobyl-2 (Duga radar)


How to evacuate a closed object tells Andrei Shabanov.
At the time of accident, he was 10 years old.


That morning he went to school, all classes were held, and only at the last lesson the teacher announced that an accident had occurred in the city of Pripyat.
What happened, or who did not explain, even the parents.
All the students were told to return home and not leave their apartments.
All the military city could not voluntarily leave.
The entire garrison participated in the elimination of the accident, after which it was transferred to a new place of military service.

Evacuation of Pripyat


In order to produce the evacuation of 47 thousand people, two thousand buses are needed.
The district administration took time to gather the necessary amount of transport, make it refuel, instruct drivers, coordinate their actions with the military and finally reach the city.

Chernobyl evacuation announcement:


Buses were taken from bus stations in Kiev.
The country plunged into a transport collapse, or whoever does not say anything, tickets at railway stations do not sell, people are advised not to leave their homes.
At night, the administration of Pripyat conducted a limited briefing of administrative personnel, conversation was conducted with staff of hospitals, schools, kindergartens.


Pripyat chernobyl evacuation video:


Chernobyl Pripyat evacuation timeline:



At 12:20 the briefing was held in the city police department.
City was divided into six sectors.
Each was assigned to responsible, for each entrance of residential house was allocated two police officers.


At 12:30 the police arrived at their places and began to instruct the residents.


At 13:10 an official announcement was given by radio (chernobyl evacuation message): "Attention, Dear comrades!
The City Council of People’s Deputies reports that in connection with accident at Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the city of Pripyat, an unfavorable radiation situation develops.
Party and Soviet bodies and military units take necessary measures.
However, in order to ensure the complete safety of people, and, in first place, children, it becomes necessary to temporarily evacuate the residents of city to nearby settlements in Kyiv region.
To this end, to each apartment building today, on April 27, starting from fourteen hours after zero, a bus will be served accompanied by police officers and representatives of the city executive committee.
It is recommended to take documents with you, extremely necessary things, as well as, for the first time, food.
Heads of enterprises and institutions defined the circle of employees who remain in place to ensure the normal functioning of the city’s enterprises.
All houses for the period of evacuation will be guarded by police.
Comrades, temporarily leaving your home, do not forget, please, close the windows, turn off the electrical and gas appliances, turn off the water taps.
Please observe peace, orderliness and order during temporary evacuation. "


At 14:00 the residents began to take buses, by 16:30 the city was evacuated.


At 18:00 the police conducted a second round of apartments to make sure there were no residents.



Together with police officers among the latter, city was left by administration staff and members of the expert commission.
On the borders of city there was a cordon.


Evacuation Chernobyl


Chernobyl was evacuated later, as it was not much further from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.
The evacuation of inhabitants took place according to the already worked out scheme.
Police officers walked around the apartments and houses, explained to all residents.
Assigned the time of collection, placed residents on buses.


In what place were people evacuated?


All residents were placed in nearby villages, the heads of rural settlements were informed in advance.
Two or four buses were brought to village, and head of the settlement distributed the evacuees to their homes.
As people say, survivors of the evacuation, there was no quarrel, everyone treated with sympathy and understanding, shared food and things.


Some then left for relatives, those who had no one to go had to wait for new houses.
New houses were built at an accelerated pace in the Kiev region.



####
document number 8: 
Two suppliers open joint facility in Port Elgin


Two Bruce Power supplier partners have opened a joint facility and retail store at 281 Goderich St., Port Elgin

Levitt-Safety and Work Authority celebrated their official opening with a ribbon cutting ceremony on Friday, June 28.
Levitt-Safety is an 85-year-old company that has become the largest specialist supplier of safety equipment and services in Canada, said Bruce Levitt, President of Levitt-Safety.

Official opening of Work Authority


Official opening of Levitt Safety


"By opening a facility so close to Bruce Power, we are better positioned to help the company solve their unique occupational challenges with quality products, services and training," Levitt said.
"Together, with Work Authority, we have created this Safety Education and Product Centre, which offers industry-leading training and education, because our companies realized the need to deliver accessible, localized safety resources for one of the province’s largest power suppliers.k Authority is a full service safety footwear and work-wear retail business, which has grown from its first store, opened in Hamilton, ON, in 1938, to 41 retail stores coast-to-coast, an additional 22 mobile stores, and an e-commerce site, said Mark Voght, Vice President of Work Authority.

"The Saugeen Shores community is an excellent market to open our 41st retail store," Voght said.
"Together with Levitt-Safety, and with Bruce Power as an anchor to employment and in the community, we are pleased to service them and all of the other local trades and businesses.
We also look forward to becoming a part of the social fabric by supporting local causes and organizations.
Our newly hired staff all live locally and Katherine, our store manager, is excited to engage the people who make this a great place to live, work and play."


Mike Rencheck, Bruce Power’s President and CEO, welcomed the opening of the first retail outlet for Levitt-Safety and Work Authority in the region, building on the relationship that has been cultivated over the years.

"Levitt-Safety and Work Authority provide our employees and tradespeople with the necessary equipment to help everyone get home safely to their families every day," Rencheck said.
"We look forward to Levitt-Safety and Work Authority offering these same services to the community, and achieving success with their new retail outlet, and we are happy to see another nuclear supplier partner invest in our local communities."

About Bruce Power

Formed in 2001, Bruce Power is an electricity company based in Bruce County, Ontario.

We are powered by our people.
Our employees are the foundation of our accomplishments and are proud of the role they play in safely delivering clean, reliable, low-cost nuclear power to families and businesses across the province.
Bruce Power has worked hard to build strong roots in Ontario and is committed to protecting the environment and supporting the communities in which we live.
Learn more at www.brucepower.com and follow us on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram and YouTube.



####
document number 9: 
Iran Says Trump's New Sanctions Have Ended Diplomacy


President Trump signed an executive order authorizing economic sanctions against Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei on Monday, after Iran shot down a U.S. drone last week.


Updated at 4:30 a.m. ET Tuesday

Hours after the White House imposed new sanctions against Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, in a televised speech, President Hassan Rouhani called the move "outrageous and idiotic."

Rouhani called the sanctions a sign that the Trump administration had "become mentally crippled."
Earlier, Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesman Abbas Mousavi tweeted that the latest "useless sanctions" marked "the permanent closure of the path of diplomacy."

Speaking from the Oval Office on Monday, Trump announced "hard-hitting" economic sanctions aimed at cutting off Khamenei and his office from certain financial assets.

As Trump signed an executive order authorizing the sanctions, he said, "These measures represent a strong and proportionate response to Iran's increasingly provocative actions."

"We will continue to increase pressure on Tehran until the regime abandons its dangerous activities and its aspirations including the pursuit of nuclear weapons, increased enrichment of uranium, development of ballistic missiles, engagement in and support for terrorism, fueling of foreign conflicts, and belligerent acts directed against the U.S. and its allies," the president added.

It wasn't immediately clear how the U.S. had access to the assets, though Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said they added up to "literally billions" that would be locked away.

In a briefing with reporters, Mnuchin declined to provide details about the assets Iran's leaders might have either in the U.S. or in the global financial system, saying, "we follow the money and it's highly effective."

As NPR's Franco Ordoñez noted, it's not clear what the Trump administration can achieve with this round of sanctions.
"The president has often talked about major things happening and they turn out not so major, or at least not as major as we expect," Ordoñez said.

The White House issued a statement Monday saying the sanctions target Iran's supreme leader because he "funds and oversees the worst elements of the Iranian regime, such as the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps."

Mnuchin said that while some of the new sanctions had been planned before the drone was downed, others were added to the U.S. response.
They include sanctions on several commanders of Iran's Revolutionary Guard.

Trump's executive order includes the supreme leader and his office, anybody appointed by the supreme leader or his office, and anybody appointed as a state official by someone who was appointed by the supreme leader or his office.

The president said last week that he called off a planned retaliatory strike against Iran.
"We were cocked loaded to retaliate last night on 3 different sights when I asked, how many will die," he tweeted on Thursday.

Ultimately, Trump decided the planned airstrike was disproportionate because of the number of possible casualties.
Since then, he has indicated that he plans to ramp up sanctions.
And it's worth noting that the Trump administration has not ruled out future military action.

"I think a lot of restraint has been shown by us.
A lot of restraint.
And that doesn't mean we're going to show it in the future," Trump said before signing the executive order.
"But I felt that we want to give this a chance — give it a good chance, because I think Iran, potentially, has a phenomenal future."

The U.S. was already enforcing stringent sanctions against Iran.
Those measures target Iran's main industries, such as oil, and also put sanctions on countries and companies that do business with Iran.
Some of those sanctions were reimposed when the U.S. pulled out of the nuclear deal with Iran.

Dina Esfandiary of The Century Foundation told NPR that these sanctions do not appear to raise the chances of future negotiations.

"The Iranians are definitely being squeezed, but as they're being squeezed, they're being pushed to the brink and really cornered, which means that it's really unlikely that they're going to return to the negotiating table as a result of additional sanctions," she says.



####
document number 10: 
Acquisition of Merrill Lynch by Bank of America


Chairman Towns, Ranking Member Issa, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve's role in the acquisition by the Bank of America Corporation of Merrill Lynch Co., Inc.
I believe that the Federal Reserve acted with the highest integrity throughout its discussions with Bank of America regarding that company's acquisition of Merrill Lynch.
I will attempt in this testimony to respond to some of the questions that have been raised.

Background On September 15, 2008, Bank of America announced an agreement to acquire Merrill Lynch.
I did not play a role in arranging this transaction and no Federal Reserve assistance was promised or provided in connection with that agreement.
As with similar transactions, the transaction was reviewed and approved by the Federal Reserve under the Bank Holding Company Act in November 2008.
It was subsequently approved by the shareholders of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch on December 5, 2008.
The acquisition was scheduled to be closed on January 1, 2009.

As you know, the period encompassing Bank of America's decision to acquire Merrill Lynch through the consummation of the merger was one of extreme stress in financial markets.
The government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, were taken into conservatorship a week before the Bank of America deal was announced.
That same week, Lehman Brothers failed, and American International Group was prevented from failing only by extraordinary government action.
Later that month, Wachovia faced intense liquidity pressures which threatened its viability and resulted in its acquisition by Wells Fargo.
In mid-October, an aggressive international response was required to avert a global banking meltdown.
In November, the possible destabilization of Citigroup was prevented by government action.
In short, the period was one of extraordinary risk for the financial system and the global economy, as well as for Bank of America and Merrill Lynch.

Discussions Regarding the Possible Termination of Agreement to Acquire Merrill Lynch On December 17, 2008, senior management of Bank of America informed the Federal Reserve for the first time that, because of significant losses at Merrill Lynch for the fourth quarter of 2008, Bank of America was considering not closing the Merrill Lynch acquisition.
This information led to a series of meetings and discussions among Bank of America, the regulatory agencies, and Treasury.
During these discussions, Bank of America's CEO, Ken Lewis, told us that the company was considering invoking the Material Adverse Event clause in the acquisition contract, known as the MAC, in an attempt to rescind its agreement to acquire Merrill Lynch.

In responding to Bank of America in these discussions, I expressed concern that invoking the MAC would entail significant risks, not only for the financial system as a whole but also for Bank of America itself, for three reasons.
First, in light of the extreme fragility of the financial system at the time, the uncertainties created by an invocation of the MAC might have triggered a broader systemic crisis that could well have destabilized Bank of America as well as Merrill Lynch.
Second, an attempt to invoke the MAC after three months of review, preparation, and public remarks by the management of Bank of America about the benefits of the acquisition would cast doubt in the minds of financial market participants--including the investors, creditors, and customers of Bank of America--about the due diligence and analysis done by the company, its capability to consummate significant acquisitions, its overall risk-management processes, and the judgment of its management.
Third, based on our staff analysis of the legal issues, we believed that it was highly unlikely that Bank of America would be successful in terminating the contract by invoking the MAC.
Rather, an attempt to invoke the MAC would likely involve extended and costly litigation with Merrill Lynch that, with significant probability, would result in Bank of America being required either to pay substantial damages or to acquire a firm whose value would have been greatly reduced or destroyed by a strong negative market reaction to the announcement.
For these reasons, I believed that, rather than invoking the MAC, Bank of America's best option, and the best option for the system, was to work with the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to develop a contingency plan to ensure that the company would remain stable should the completion of the acquisition and the announcement of losses lead to financial stress, particularly a sudden pullback of funding of the type that had been experienced by Wachovia, Lehman, and other firms.

Ultimately, on December 30, the Bank of America board determined to go forward with the acquisition.
The staff of the Federal Reserve worked diligently with Treasury, other regulators, and Bank of America to put in place a package that would help to shore up the combined company's financial position and reduce the risk of market disruption.
The plan was completed in time to be announced simultaneously with Bank of America's public earnings announcement, which had been moved forward to January 16, 2009, from January 20, 2009.
The package included an additional $20 billion equity investment from the Troubled Asset Relief Program and a loss-protection arrangement, or ring fence, for a pool of assets valued at about $118 billion.
The ring-fence arrangement has not been consummated, and Bank of America now believes that, in light of the general improvement in the markets, this protection is no longer needed.

Importantly, the decision to go forward with the merger rightly remained in the hands of Bank of America's board and management, and they were obligated to make the choice they believed was in the best interest of their shareholders and company.
I did not tell Bank of America's management that the Federal Reserve would take action against the board or management if they decided to proceed with the MAC.
Moreover, I did not instruct anyone to indicate to Bank of America that the Federal Reserve would take any particular action under those circumstances.
I agreed with the view of others that the invocation of the MAC clause in this case involved significant risk for Bank of America, as well as for Merrill Lynch and the financial system as a whole, and it was this concern that I communicated to Mr.
Lewis and his colleagues.

Disclosures The Federal Reserve also acted appropriately regarding issues of public disclosure.
As I wrote in a letter to this Committee, neither I nor any member of the Federal Reserve ever directed, instructed, or advised Bank of America to withhold from public disclosure any information relating to Merrill Lynch, including its losses, compensation packages or bonuses, or any other related matter.
These disclosure obligations belong squarely with the company, and the Federal Reserve did not interfere in the company's disclosure decisions.

The Federal Reserve had a legitimate interest in knowing when Bank of America or Merrill Lynch intended to disclose the losses at Merrill Lynch.
Given the fragility of the financial markets at that time, we were concerned about the potential for a strong, adverse market reaction to the reports of significant losses at Merrill Lynch.
If federal assistance to stabilize these companies were to be effective, the necessary facilities would have to be in place as of the disclosure date.
Thus, our planning was importantly influenced by the companies' planned disclosure schedule.
But the decisions and responsibilities regarding public disclosure always remained, as it should, with the companies themselves.

A related question is whether there should have been earlier disclosure of the aid provided by the U.S. government to Bank of America.
Importantly, there was no commitment on the part of the government regarding the size or structure of the transaction until very late in the process.
Although we had indicated to Bank of America in December that the government would provide assistance if necessary to keep the company from being destabilized, as it had done in other cases during this time of extraordinary stress in the financial markets, those December discussions were followed in January by significant and intense negotiations involving Bank of America, the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency regarding many key aspects of the assistance transaction, including the type of assistance to be provided, the size of the protection, the assets to be covered, the terms for payments, the fees, and the length of the facility.
The agreement in principle on these items was reflected in a term sheet that was not finalized until just before its public release on January 16, 2009.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Treasury completely and appropriately disclosed the information as required by the Congress in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008.

In retrospect, I believe that our actions in this episode, including the development of an assistance package that facilitated the consummation of Bank of America's acquisition of Merrill Lynch, were not only done with the highest integrity, but have strengthened both companies while enhancing the stability of the financial markets and protecting the taxpayers.
These actions were taken under highly unusual circumstances in the face of grave threats to our financial system and our economy.
To avoid such situations in the future, it is critical that the Administration, the Congress, and the regulatory agencies work together to develop a new framework that strengthens and expands supervisory oversight and includes a broader range of tools to promote financial stability.

I would be pleased to take your questions.



####
document number 11: 
PHOTOS: Highlights Of The Trump-Kim Summit In Singapore


After shaking hands with Kim Jong Un Tuesday morning, President Trump said, "I feel really great.
It's going to be a great discussion and I think tremendous success.
I think it's going to be really successful and I think we will have a terrific relationship.
I have no doubt."


The day began with a historic handshake, the first meeting ever between a sitting U.S. president and a North Korean leader.
As Kim Jong Un and President Trump strode toward each other and clasped hands Tuesday morning at the Capella resort on Singapore's Sentosa Island, it marked a diplomatic milestone — and the start of what seems certain to be a long negotiation process over North Korea's nuclear program.

"I feel really great," the president said after the handshake.

"Well, it was not easy to get here," Kim said.
"Old prejudices and practices worked as obstacles on our way forward.
But we overcame all of them, and we are here today."

The two leaders first sat down for a private meeting, followed by another with their advisers.
In the afternoon, they signed a brief statement calling for peace, committing to recover the remains of U.S. service members from the Korean War and asserting a "firm and unwavering commitment to complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula."

The subject of North Korea's human rights abuses was not mentioned, and President Trump also announced that the U.S. would stop its longstanding joint military exercises with South Korea, which he called "very provocative."

As the day wrapped up, the president told reporters, "We have developed a very special bond."
But, he acknowledged, "Today is the beginning of an arduous process."

President Trump gestures to reporters as he meets with North Korea's leader Kim Jong Un at the start of the U.S.-North Korea summit in Singapore on Tuesday.




####
document number 12: 
EXCLUSIVE: U.S. indicts North Koreans, Chinese for illegal financial deals


President Donald Trump, left, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, center, and South Korean President Moon Jae-in, right, walk together at the border village of Panmunjom in Demilitarized Zone, South Korea, Sunday, June 30, 2019.
(AP Photo/Susan Walsh) **FILE**


U.S. prosecutors have indicted 28 North Koreans and five Chinese nationals as part of a global network of companies charged with circumventing U.S. sanctions by covertly accessing the American financial system.

The 14-count federal grand jury indictment represents the largest enforcement action ever against North Korea by the Justice Department, which has played a stepped-up role under the Trump administration to enforce sanctions policies toward North Korea and China.

An indictment unsealed Thursday in Washington accuses the North Koreans of using the state-run Foreign Trade Bank of North Korea in Pyongyang and hundreds of front companies around the world of being part of an operation to avoid U.S. financial sanctions.

"The defendants in this case used more than 250 front companies to allegedly obscure $2.5 billion in illicit financial dealings conducted by North Korea’s Foreign Trade Bank," said Michael R.
Sherwin, acting U.S. attorney for the District of Columbia.

"Through this indictment, the United States has signified its commitment to hampering North Korea’s ability to illegally access the U.S. financial system and limit its ability to use proceeds from that illicit action to enhance its illegal weapons of mass destruction programs," Mr. Sherwin told The Washington Times.







The U.S. government has seized at least $63.5 million of the funds from the North Koreans through forfeiture actions over the past five years, and the U.S. government and the U.N. Security Council have sanctioned the Foreign Trade Bank.

The investigation has been underway since at least 2018, officials said.
The charges include conspiracy, bank fraud, violations of weapons of mass destruction sanctions regulations and money laundering.
The locations of those named in the indictment are not known.
The unsealing of the court papers Thursday appeared to be a "name and shame" move to highlight Pyongyang’s illicit networks.

The Foreign Trade Bank was hit with Treasury Department sanctions in March 2013 when the Obama administration was attempting to curb North Korean ballistic missile and nuclear programs.
It was the first time the Justice Department indicted a group of North Koreans for illicit financial activities.

The indictment also revealed that at least four Chinese banks and several Chinese companies, including two telecommunications companies and an electronics company, helped the North Koreans purchase equipment and move cash.
Most of Chinese banks and companies were not identified by name.

Despite global sanctions, China remains an economic lifeline for its poor neighbor.
At least 90% of North Korea’s trade goes through China.

Two of the Chinese firms were identified as Dandong Kehua, described in the indictment as a co-conspirator, and Panda International Information Technology, which the Commerce Department sanctioned in 2014.

Extensive dollar transactions

According to the 16-page indictment, the North Koreans conducted extensive dollar transactions for the trade bank.
Two of the bank’s presidents, Ko Chol-man an and Kim Song-ui, and two bank vice presidents, Han Ung and Ri Jong-nam, were among those indicted.
The Trump administration sanctioned Mr. Ko in 2017 as a North Korean government official.

Two of the North Korean defendants worked for a covert branch of the Foreign Trade Bank in Shenyang, China, and three others operated North Korean front companies identified as Sumer International Group Ltd.
and Headsoon Trading, U.S. officials allege.

The indictment says the North Koreans have been using the U.S. financial system illegally since March 2013 and purchased products and services for the domestic economy.

The front companies’ covert bank branches were widely spread, including in Beijing and Zuhai, China, and in Austria, Kuwait, Libya and Thailand.
The North Korean official in charge of the Thai front was identified as Han Ki-song, a member of the Reconnaissance General Bureau, a civilian North Korean intelligence agency.

Two Russia-based Foreign Trade Bank fronts were located in Vladivostok, in the country’s Far East, and Khabarovsk.

Some of the charges were issued under the 1977 International Emergency Powers Act, which allows the president to impose economic sanctions related to national security, foreign policy or economic threats.

The indictment also cites alleged North Korean violations of a 2016 executive order aimed at curbing the export of U.S. financial services that could boost North Korea’s pursuit of nuclear and missile programs.

Additional violations of the Bank Secrecy Act were identified by the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, and other charges were issued under the USA Patriot Act.

"The defendants and other co-conspirators took up residence in foreign countries to operate these covert branches, from which they opened and operated front companies and worked with established third-party financial facilitators to procure commodities and facilitate payments in U.S. dollars on behalf of parties in North Korea," the indictment states.

The Pyongyang-based Foreign Trade Bank concealed its role in the dollar payments from U.S. and other foreign banks "in order to trick the banks into processing payments" that were prohibited, the indictment states.

More front companies were established after the government or foreign banks uncovered the identities of the North Korean financial institutions.

Prosecutors said the indictments were based on intercepted communications between the North Koreans and the various companies, including specific cash transfers starting in 2013 and continuing until as recently as January.
The payments ranged in size from around $10,000 to $13.9 million.



####
document number 13: 
When I Wanted To Be Quarantined


I walked through a hospital door marked "Nuclear Medicine Department" knowing that when I left, I’d be radioactive.

It took just a few minutes for the doctor to administer 100 millicuries of radioactive iodine, or I-131.
He wore a surgical mask, gloves, and a heavy lead apron.
He removed the pill, with tongs, from a cylindrical canister and dropped it into a paper cup.
Then he backed out of the room.
"As soon you’re ready," he said from the hall, "make your way out of the hospital."

I took a deep breath.
Get on with it, I thought.
This pill was the last step of my treatment for thyroid cancer.
Taking it would ensure the cancer was all gone, and that was all I wanted.

But first the pill would make me dangerous to others.
For at least 24 hours, I’d emit radiation.
For several days, my sweat, saliva, and urine would be radioactive.
For 10 days, I was supposed to avoid contact with other people.

These days, quarantine is all over the news: Several states have instituted mandatory quarantines for healthcare workers and anyone else exposed to Ebola, and Americans overwhelmingly support these measures.
Like many people, I’ve been following the story of Kaci Hickox, the Maine nurse put under mandatory quarantine after returning from Sierra Leone.
She has resisted the order, saying that she doesn’t pose a threat to public health and the quarantine violates her civil rights.

But as I prepared to swallow that pill, quarantine was exactly what I wanted.
In the summer of 2008, I spent so many hours in waiting and exam rooms wishing I was somewhere else.
That morning, though, I wanted to stay at Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Oakland, California.
I wanted to stay in a lead-lined room until it was safe for me to be around other people.

Instead, I ingested radioactive iodine, then walked out the door marked "Nuclear Medicine Department" and immediately collided with a man in the hall.

I got my diagnosis two months earlier, on May 30, 2008.
It was my 32nd birthday.

"If you

have

to get cancer, this is the one to get," said the endocrinologist who called with the news.

I had papillary thyroid cancer, which has a survival rate of 97 percent over five years—in large part because of radioactive iodine (I-131).
Unlike chemotherapy, which attacks healthy and cancerous cells alike, I-131 is targeted.
Since thyroid cells alone absorb and retain iodine, the radioactive iodine pill essentially acts like a "heat-seeking missile": It finds and destroys thyroid cells.

In July, a surgeon removed my thyroid, the butterfly-shaped gland that produces hormones that help regulate metabolism, heart rate, and body temperature, among other things.

Five weeks later, I met with a doctor to prep for my I-131 treatment.
His weary, clipped manner suggested he was tired of dealing with anxious patients.
He gave me a handout with instructions like: "Stay seven feet away from other people for 5 to 11 days."

On the verge of going radioactive, I wanted to be told exactly what to do.
There were only two things about which the doctor was absolutely clear: I was to have no contact with children and pregnant women.
And I could not get a ride home from the hospital.

If I had taken that same dose of I-131 in Europe, I probably would have been quarantined in a hospital for a few days.
But the U.S. did away with required hospital quarantines for radioactive iodine in 1997—in fact, it’s rarely an option.
Many hospitals have eliminated their radiation isolation rooms.

I went home, but before I got out of the car, I wiped down the steering wheel, gear shift, and door handle with disinfectant wipes.
Then I headed into the guest bedroom of the house I shared with my boyfriend at the time.

Time dragged in those 10 days.
Lacking the concentration to read, I watched the first season of

Lost

on DVD.
I was totally confused, but riveted, by the plot: plane crash survivors marooned on an island where nothing is what it seems.

Every time I prowled into the kitchen for food, I wore surgical latex gloves.
I always hurried back to bed to eat on paper plates with plastic utensils.

I wiped down the sink and flushed the toilet twice after every use.
At the end of the week, I tossed out the sheets and towels I’d used.
I filled a trash bag with radioactive waste, which I put in the garbage bin with some concern.
I hoped I wasn’t endangering sanitation workers or causing radioactive alarms to go off at the dump.

I emerged from the room after 10 days, and burst into tears when I got my first big hug.
I had stayed isolated for the longest time recommended by my doctor.
Still, I worried about having trace amounts of radiation inside my body for another month or so.

I had been given a paper card to carry in my wallet listing the dose and date of my treatment in case I traveled by plane and needed to explain why I was setting off the radiation alarm.
I visited friends in Seattle one month after taking the pill and held my breath as I walked through security.

I don’t think Kaci Hickox, the nurse in Maine, was being cavalier when she went out for a bike ride.
She hasn’t shown any symptoms of Ebola, which is the only time a person is contagious, and her work in Sierra Leone demonstrates her selfless concern—at the risk of her own health—for others.

Thinking about Hickox on her bike, I’m also thinking about the 60,000 people diagnosed with thyroid cancer in the U.S. last year.
Many of them, like me, will need to swallow that strange pill, and then wonder how to leave the hospital and where to go.

Becca MacLaren is history and engagement editor at Zócalo Public Square.


TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture.
We welcome outside contributions.
Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.



####
document number 14: 
Iran's Tankers and Its Smuggling Tactics


Smuggling in Persia goes back to ancient times, but the Islamic Republic has become increasingly adept at illicit trafficking in oil since the United States re-imposed economic sanctions in November 2018.
Iran’s single largest source of revenue is from oil exports; by mid-2019, 70 percent of its income was from petroleum products.
Iran has used its fleet of 54 oil tankers—the second largest state-owned fleet in the world—as a tool to game sanctions to continue selling its oil.

An Iranian oil tanker approaching Rotterdam in the Netherlands in 2007


Iran’s tanker fleet is vulnerable to attacks and sabotage.
On October 11, Iranian state media

reported

that the Sabiti, a tanker owned by the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC), was struck by missiles in the Red Sea.
Saheb Sadeghi, the NITC head of public relations, said the missiles were "possibly" fired from Saudi territory.
But the National Iranian Oil Company later dismissed that possibility.
The Sabiti was reportedly 60 miles from the Saudi port of Jeddah when it was hit.

The Sabiti stopped transmitting its position in August near the Iranian port city of Bandar Abbas.
Its transmissions resumed on October 11, shortly after the incident.
Iranian crews have often turned off their ships’ transponders to evade detection and illicitly sell oil.
The Sabiti had previously delivered one million barrels of oil to Syria, according to Tanker Trackers in September 2019.
Iran’s sale of oil to Syria violated E.U. sanctions against the Assad regime and U.S. sanctions on Iran’s oil industry.


#Oil leakage from Iranian Suezmax #tanker #Sabiti is under control and there was no fire on the vessel, owner National Iranian Tanker Company said in a statement | https://t.co/7dZt7KJFHg 📷: #NITC pic.twitter.com/R83xRqAq7i — Platts Oil (@PlattsOil) October 11, 2019

Since 1995, Iran has faced three periods of sanctions on its petroleum industry:

First round: In 1995, the United States banned all American involvement with petroleum development in Iran.
In August 1996, U.S. Congress passed the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act that imposed tough penalties on companies found investing more than $20 million a year in Iran’s oil and gas industry.
Foreign companies suspended contracts in Iranian oil and gas fields and deferred bidding on new investments.
The National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) had to offer greater incentives to negotiate contracts for supplies formerly sold to U.S. companies.
But the sanctions had limited short-term effect on Iran’s economy.

Second round: In 2010, during the Obama administration, U.S. Congress passed the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act, which targeted firms investing in Iran’s energy sector or selling refined petroleum to Tehran.
The law also imposed sanctions on foreign banks conducting business with Iran.
In June 2010, the U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1929, which tightened sanctions on foreign companies aiding Iran’s nuclear program.
In 2012, the European Union implemented a set of targeted sanctions that banned the import, purchase and transport of Iranian crude oil and petroleum projects.
It also froze the assets of Iran’s Central Bank in the European Union at a time that E.U. countries imported 20 percent of Iran’s oil.
International sanctions were lifted in 2016, six months after a nuclear deal with the world’s six major powers limited Iran’s nuclear program.

Third round: In November 2018, the Trump administration re-imposed sanctions six months after withdrawing from the 2015 nuclear deal.
The Europeans, China and Russia—the other partners to the deal—continued to honor its terms.
The United States granted temporary six-month waivers to a few countries—China, India, South Korea, Turkey, Taiwan, Malaysia, South Africa, Singapore and Sri Lanka—that had long depended on Iranian energy.
The waivers were lifted in May 2019, when the United States launched its "maximum pressure" campaign to cut Iran’s oil exports down to zero.
The Trump administration also threatened to sanction any foreign company or country that dared to buy from Iran.

Tehran soon struggled to find buyers for its oil.
Traditional customers, such as South Korea, halted purchases of Iranian crude.
Chinese companies appeared more hesitant to do business with Iran for fear of financial penalties.
In June 2019, China imported only 210,000 barrels per day (bpd) of Iranian crude—the lowest in nearly a decade and 60 percent below imports from Iran in June 2018.
Iran’s oil exports plummeted, from a high of 3.2 million bpd in 2016 (after the first round of sanctions ended) to a low of 160,000 bpd in August 2019—down 87 percent from 2016.

Tehran has employed four tactics to circumvent sanctions so it can continue to peddle its oil:

It has stored oil on its tanker fleet at sea while it searched for potential buyers willing to risk U.S. sanctions.


It has disguised its ships—by renaming them while at sea, reflagging them under other countries, and changing the unique identification codes—to evade international tracking systems.


It has reportedly turned off transponders required by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to monitor ship movements.


It has conducted discrete ship-to-ship transfers of oil by turning off the transponders on its tankers.
Iranian ships used offshore transfers to covertly deliver its oil to ships owned by countries including China and Syria.



Iran has bragged about beating the sanctions regime.
"If there is an art that we have perfected in Iran, and we can teach it to others for a price, it is the art of evading sanctions," Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif said, in December 2018, at the Doha Forum.
Between May 2 and September 10, 2019, at least a dozen Iranian oil tankers delivered crude oil to China, Syria, and Turkey.

Iran’s Tanker Fleet


The National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) transports Iranian crude exports on behalf of the National Iranian Oil Company.
The NITC began operations in 1955 with one 35,000-ton tanker.
In the early 1970s, it became the 19th largest oil company in the world, comparable to other medium-sized companies—Italy’s ENI or private U.S. companies such as the Atlantic Richfield Company and Occidental.
The NITC expanded its operations to keep up with Iran’s increasing oil exports.
By 1974, the fleet included four tankers.

In 1987, at the peak of the so-called Tanker War between Iran and Iraq, Tehran had a total fleet of 17 tankers.
During the conflict, Iraq attacked tankers ferrying Iranian oil, mainly at the northern end of the Gulf.
One ship, the 176,000-ton tanker Dena, was attacked by Iraq five separate times between 1984 and 1987.
The war made it difficult for Iran to transport oil cheaply because of increased insurance rates on Iranian cargo.
As a result, Tehran increasingly relied on its national fleet.


In 2012, Iran purchased 12 additional supertankers from Chinese shipyards, which expanded its fleet from 39 to 51 tankers.
Iran’s total shipping capacity increased from 61.5 million barrels to 85.5 million barrels.
By 2019, Iran had 54 tankers, including 38 very large crude carriers, or VLCCs, and eight Suezmaxes, according to Lloyd’s List Intelligence.
It had a total shipping capacity of 14.1 million tons, or 102 million barrels, the NITC reported.

Since 2018, Tehran has been dependent on its large fleet to export oil as international tanker companies cut back on transporting its petroleum products due to the difficulty in getting insurance to carry Iranian cargo.
After the United States re-imposed sanctions in 2018, Iran used its fleet in two different ways— to ship to buyers and to store oil for future sales.
In March 2019, Iran used 12 tankers, over a fifth of its fleet, for floating storage of unsold stocks, according to MarineTraffic.
In August 2019, with exports plummeting, Iran needed only 42 of its tankers to ship oil.

Before sanctions, Tehran leased idle vessels to major oil companies.
Between 2015 and 2017, the brief window when U.S. sanctions were lifted, the NITC signed 215 contracts to lease its tankers.
The contracts were either for single voyages or time-charter agreements, which permit companies to charter ships for a set period of time.
Tankers were leased to France’s Total, Royal Dutch Shell, Spain's Cepsa, Dutch energy firm Vitol, Hanwha Total of South Korea, India's Essar, Turkish refiner Tupras, and China's CNPC.
Many of these companies terminated contracts with the NITC after the Trump administration reinstated sanctions on Iran’s shipping industry in November 2018.

In 2019, Tehran faced another problem: It needed to modernize its aging oil tanker fleet; 16 of Iran’s 54 tankers were at least 19 years old, according to international shipping records.
Oil tankers typically have a lifespan of around 15 years to 20 years in the industry.
In November 2019, Brian Hook, the U.S. Special Representative for Iran, described Tehran’s ageing tanker fleet as a "floating liability."
U.S. sanctions crippled its ability to buy new ships.
Iran’s talks with South Korea about the purchase of 10 new supertankers were delayed by U.S. sanctions.
An Iranian official said that Tehran was looking at "all options," which included finding new ships in Vietnam and Greece.

Ownership of the NITC has been murky.
It was originally run by the state under both the monarchy and the theocracy.
It was privatized in 2000 after a consortium of three Iranian pension funds purchased its shares.
But Western officials claimed that the company was still tied to the regime.
The privatization was purportedly a fictional scheme to shield NITC from sanctions.

The Wandering Tanker



Iran’s Oil Tanker Adrian Darya Reaches Destination: Spokesman https://t.co/qoTebdHUkq pic.twitter.com/f6FM9AhTgB — Iran Front Page (@IranFrontPage) September 8, 2019


In 2019, the Adrian Darya-1—originally named the Grace 1—became the most infamous case of tanker deception.
The United States accused Iran of transporting 2.1 million barrels of crude for the financial gain of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), which had been separately sanctioned.
As the Grace 1, the tanker was originally flagged as a Panamanian vessel; it was seized by Gibraltar on July 4.
British authorities claimed the ship was attempting to smuggle oil to Syria in violation of E.U. sanctions on Syria.
Iran denied the claim but refused to name the buyer.

Gibraltar released the oil tanker on August 15, after Tehran provided written guarantees that the ship would not deliver oil to Syria.
On August 18, the Grace 1 changed its name to the Adrian Darya-1 and raised an Iranian flag before departing the Gibraltar port.
After its release, the tanker wandered the Mediterranean as Iran looked for a buyer and a location to offload its oil.

The tanker changed its destination several times between August 15 and September 3.
Its first destination was listed as Kalamata, Greece, but the Greek government said it had no contact with the ship, nor did it have the capacity to host a tanker.
The ship then headed for Iskenderun, Turkey, but it went dark off the coast of Syria.
On September 8, Iran’s foreign ministry announced that it had finally sold the tanker’s oil but did not name the buyer.
The ship was tracked off the coast of Tartus, Syria.
Britain claimed that Iran had sold the cargo to Syria.


WE NOW HAVE VISUAL CONFIRMATION The #AdrianDarya1 is still fully laden and sitting in the anchorage of Baniyas.
Again, won't be able to deliver to either Baniyas or Tartous without offloading a million barrels via a Ship-to-Ship transfer first.
Captured by @planetlabs #OOTT pic.twitter.com/sq6lB0n7MX — TankerTrackers.com, Inc.
⚓️🛢 (@TankerTrackers) September 28, 2019

Smuggling Tactics


When Washington blocked one route Iran used to export oil, Tehran found another.
"In future months, the Americans themselves will see that we will continue our oil exports," Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said in April 2019.

Going "Dark"


Tankers are equipped with an Automatic Identification System or A.I.S. that continuously broadcasts their location.
An International Maritime Organization treaty, overseen by the United Nations, requires all ships of 300 tons or more to turn on their A.I.S. when traveling international routes.
The system was designed to avoid collisions and aid in search-and-rescue operations.
It also allows local maritime authorities to monitor traffic around their border using on-shore receivers.
In 2012, ships smuggling Iranian oil began turning off tracking signals and stopped reporting positions when they neared ports to mitigate buyers’ anxieties.
In 2012, only seven of Iran’s 25 supertankers operated on-board transponders.
The rest of the fleet traveled in stealth mode.

Between May and August 2019, at least six Iranian ships turned off their A.I.S. transponders when crossing the Suez Canal to hide their positions before they offloaded cargo in Syria and Turkey,

The New York Times

reported.
Each tanker reemerged with a change in draft, the measurement of a ship’s depth in the water.
In all six cases, the Iranian tanker left the Eastern Mediterranean riding lighter, which indicated that the ship had unloaded its cargo.
During the same period, at least six other Iranian ships were tracked using similar tactics for covert deliveries to China.

Reflagging and Renaming


Under international maritime law, merchant ships must be registered with a country.
Tehran has registered the majority of its ships under flags of convenience, including countries such as Panama, Bolivia, Liberia, Togo, and Tanzania.
These states maintain an open registry, which allows ship owners to register vessels without ties to the country.
Most flags have nationality or residency requirement for ship registration.
Countries that offer so-called flags of convenience typically have lax shipping regulations conducive to smuggling operations.

Some countries removed Iran’s tankers from their registries after the United States tightened sanctions.
Between January and July 2019, Panama delisted over 50 Iranian tankers.
Iran was forced to relist ships under its own flag, which in turn led foreign companies to be less willing to accept deliveries.
Foreign maritime officials were also more likely to search ships with an Iranian flag.

To disguise ship identities, Iran also reflagged some of its tankers on the open waters to add an extra layer of protection to smuggling operations.
Once a ship registers under the flag of a new country, that country’s laws apply to the vessel.
Each country is responsible for the activities of the ships flying its flag and must ensure they abide by international maritime law.
Reflagging tankers allowed Tehran plausible deniability for smuggling oil and breaking sanctions under the cover of foreign flags.

Iran also changed the names of its tankers to confuse global ship-monitoring systems.
Iranian ships engaged in smuggling regularly changed their names—notably the Grace 1 became the Adrian Darya 1—to obfuscate illicit activities.
In September 2019, Iran changed the names of three supertankers smuggling Iranian oil to China.
The Sea Dragon was renamed the Nexo; the Ming Zhu was renamed the Artemis; and the Gas Infinity was renamed the Echo Star, according to data from Kpler.
Each ship was assigned a unique IMO code, which made it possible for maritime intelligence companies to track the ships despite their name changes.

Ship-to-Ship Transfers


Iran used ship-to-ship transfers to conceal oil sales.
In the shipping industry, transfers are commonly used to break up large shipments into smaller cargoes.
Iran used the practice to transfer crude oil from its tankers—either stationed near a port or out at sea—to a non-Iranian vessel "to mask the fact that the true origin of the oil is from Iran and to introduce it into the global market as if it were non-Iranian oil," according to the U.S. Treasury.
The cargo, disguised as non-Iranian, was then sold to buyers.

In April 2019, Iran shipped as much as 300,000 bpd of oil using ship-to-ship transfers.
Large VLCC tankers linked to China’s National Petroleum Company reportedly conducted ship-to-ship transfers of Iranian crude off the coast of Malacca.
The oil cargo was then covertly delivered to China.

Offshore Storage


In 2019, Iran had insufficient on-shore space to store excess oil while searching for buyers, so it stored oil on large tankers that either sailed in circles around the Persian Gulf or docked in Iran’s territorial waters.
In August 2019, Iran’s tanker storage capacity was full, with more than 111 million barrels stockpiled offshore on 12 tankers, a fifth of its total fleet.
The large percentage of tankers devoted to storage reduced Iran’s export capacity.


International Maritime Coalition in the Persian Gulf


On July 22, the United States announced Operation Sentinel, an international maritime coalition to protect vital shipping routes in the Persian Gulf.
The Pentagon said the mission would be "to increase surveillance of and security in key waterways in the Middle East to ensure freedom of navigation" in the Gulf, through which roughly one-fifth of the world’s oil passes.
Britain also announced its own European-led "maritime protection mission" to safeguard international shipping lanes.
London claimed it would coordinate with the United States’ Operation Sentinel campaign but launched its own initiative to include European countries that would not contribute to a U.S.-led force.
On August 5, Britain formally said it would join the United States in a "new international maritime security mission" to protect shipping in the Persian Gulf.

The U.S. and British initiatives followed attacks on six foreign tankers between May and June outside the Strait of Hormuz in the Gulf of Oman.
Operation Sentinel will escort flagged vessels of participating nations in coordination with European, Asian and Middle Eastern allies.
The following countries have committed to work alongside or collaborate with the U.S.-led maritime mission: Australia, Bahrain, Britain, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.

Historical Cases


The following are documented cases of Iranian ships engaged in oil smuggling operations.
The dates given for each ship represent the period of illicit activity.

The Tour 2: March 2012 –April 2013

Iran

used

multiple deceptive tactics to cover the tracks of the Tour 2, which discreetly shipped oil to the Assad regime in Syria.
In 2007, Tehran

reflagged

the tanker from Iran to Malta; it also changed the tanker’s name from the Tour to the ISIM Tour to preemptively avoid U.S. sanctions.
In September 2008, the United States

announced

sanctions on Tehran’s shipping industry, which prompted Iran to use foreign front companies to mask ownership of its tanker fleet.
Tehran

used

a Maltese front company to disguise the Tour’s ownership and hide its connection to the Iranian government.
In April 2012, Iran again reflagged the tanker to Bolivia while it was carrying smuggled oil through the Suez Canal.
In June 2012, the ship appeared in a

report

by the U.N. Panel of Experts on Iran, which described specific instances of Iranian smuggling operations using its tanker fleet.
After the report, the Tour 2 was listed under different names and flags, including the Sierra Leone and the Togo, but it remained in the service of Iran.
The tanker

delivered

oil to the Assad regime at least three times between March 2012 and April 2013, according to the U.N. report.

The Iran Astaneh: July 2012

The Iran Astaneh was an Iranian oil tanker registered to the NITC.
In July 2012, Iran changed the vessel’s name to the Neptune to conceal its identity as an Iranian vessel and make finding a buyer easier.
The tanker was anchored off the coast of Bandar Abbas and served as a storage facility for hundreds of thousands of barrels of Iranian crude in the Persian Gulf.
In December 2013, the U.S. Treasury sanctioned the ship for its role in facilitating the illegal sale of Iranian oil.

The Millionaire: December 2012

The Millionaire was owned by the NITC but was flagged to Tanzania.
Iran programmed the tanker’s GPS system to send incorrect satellite signals that confused global tracking systems.
The falsified signals disguised the identity of the Millionaire as a Syrian-owned ship, the Lady Rasha.
The tactic was used to confuse tracking systems and conceal the vessel’s destination.
The Millionaire changed its MMSI—a code that provides information on a ship’s identity and position—to match the Lady Rasha’s number.
One international tracking signal showed the Millionaire sailing the Lady Rasha’s course through the Mediterranean.
Another satellite signal showed the tanker sailing though the Indian Ocean to sell its cargo in East Asia before returning to Iran.

Timeline


1908

Oil was discovered in Khuzestan province in the southwest of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The Masjid-i-Solaiman was the country’s first oil well.
It was also the first well in the Middle East.

1912

The Anglo-Persian Oil Company built the Abadan oil refinery on the Persian Gulf.
At the time, it was one of the largest oil refineries in the world and significantly increased Iranian crude oil production.

1920s

Iran became one of the top five oil producers in the world.
It accounted for five to six percent of global production.

1951

Tehran nationalized the oil industry after a series of disputes between the Iranian government and Anglo Iranian Oil Company, which had been administered by the British government.
Tehran formed the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) to manage its oil exports.

1955

The National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) began operations with one 35,000-ton tanker.
The NITC was formed to transport Iranian crude exports on behalf of the NIOC.

1974

The NITC had a total fleet of four tankers.

1979 Revolution


1984 – 1988 Iran-Iraq Tanker War

In 1980, Iraq invaded Iran.
Saddam Hussein wanted to take advantage of the chaos following Iran’s revolution and weaken his top regional rival.
Iraq attacked Iranian ships in the northern Persian Gulf starting in 1981, but Iran did not respond with similar attacks for three years.
The so-called Tanker War was launched in March 1984 by Iraq’s airstrike on Iran’s Kharg Island oil terminus and several Iranian ships.
Two months later, Iran began to target ships ferrying oil for Iraq.
Between 1984 and 1988, a total of 451 ships were hit in the Gulf.

1987

At the peak of the war, Tehran had a total fleet of 17 tankers.
The war made it difficult for Iran to transport oil cheaply because of increased insurance rates on Iranian cargo.
As a result, Tehran increasingly relied on its national fleet.

1996

Aug.
5 - The U.S. Congress passed the Iran-Libya Sanctions Act to deter foreign investment in Iran’s energy sector.
The act imposed tough penalties on companies found investing more than $20 million a year in Iran’s oil and gas industry.

2010

June 9 – The U.N. Security Council adopted Resolution 1929 which tightened proliferation-related sanctions on Iran.
It banned Tehran from testing missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads and imposed an embargo on the transfer of major weapons systems to Iran.
Major players in Iran’s energy sector were liable to be sanctioned for supporting nuclear or ballistic missile development.

June 24 – The U.S. Congress passed the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act, which targeted firms investing in Iran’s energy sector or selling refined petroleum to Tehran.
It also imposed sanctions on foreign banks conducting business with Iran.

2012

Iran purchased 12 additional supertankers from Chinese shipyards, which expanded its fleet from 39 to 51 tankers.

Jan.
23 – The European Union adopted a set of targeted sanctions that banned the import, purchase, and transport of Iranian crude oil and petroleum projects, effective July 1.
It also agreed to freeze the assets of Iran’s central bank in the European Union.
E.U. countries imported 20 percent of Iran’s oil at the time.

July 12 – The United States first designated the NITC.
"The Treasury Department is also identifying today the National Iranian Tanker Company (NITC) as a Government of Iran entity and, for the first time, the NITC fleet and various front companies belonging to NITC," Treasury said in a press release.

Aug.
1 – The U.S. Congress passed The Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Human Rights Act.
It targeted companies conducting business with Iran’s national oil company and tanker fleet, such as insurers and shippers.

2016

The NITC owned 66 total oil tankers.
Its fleet was very old, with 21 tankers built in 2000 or earlier.

Jan.
16 – The 2015 nuclear deal went into its implementation phase.
The United States, European Union, and United Nations lifted or suspended certain sanctions.
Iran also regained access to the international financial system, repatriated billions of dollars in frozen assets abroad, and returned to the oil market.

2018

May 8 – President Trump announced the U.S. withdrawal from the 2015 nuclear deal, known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and reimposition of sanctions on Iran.
Britain, France and Germany moved to salvage the accord.
Iran stated its intent to continue with the deal if its economic benefits could be guaranteed.
Both China and Russia said they intended to observe the JCPOA and continue to trade with Iran.
Foreign companies began withdrawing from Iran rather than risk running afoul of U.S. sanctions.

2019

Iran’s fleet totaled at least 54 tankers, including 38 VLCCs and eight Suezmaxes, according to Lloyd’s List Intelligence.

April 22 – The United States announced that it would stop granting sanctions exemptions to eight countries that imported Iranian oil: India, China, Turkey, Italy, Greece, South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan.
"We will continue to apply maximum pressure on the Iranian regime until its leaders change their destructive behavior, respect the rights of the Iranian people, and return to the negotiating table," said Secretary of State Mike Pompeo.
He noted that oil sales accounted for up to 40 percent of Iran’s revenue.
The Trump administration's stated goal was to bring Iranian exports down to zero.

Photo credits: Dena tanker in 2007 by AlfvanBeem [CC0], from Wikimedia Commons; Home page photo of Dena by AlvanBeem [CCO], from Wikimedia Commons



####
document number 15: 
How the CIA Allegedly Infected Offline Computers


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


A story from Motherboard.
Hacking air-gapped machines—computers that are not connected to the internet, so theoretically less vulnerable—is always pretty interesting.
On Wednesday, Wikileaks published a series of alleged CIA documents that supposedly show how the intelligence agency's malware was designed to infect these sort of targets.
Naturally, the documents indicate how the CIA has continued to develop its own hacking tools, allegedly targeting devices from smart TVs to internet routers.
According to one of the documents, "Brutal Kangaroo is a tool suite for targeting closed networks by air gap jumping using thumbdrives."
The 11 files allegedly come from the CIA's Engineering Development Group, and appear to date from 2012 to 2016.
In short, a CIA operator first remotely installs a piece of malware on a system connected to the internet, the "primary host."
Then, an unwitting user inserts a USB drive into that system, and the malware infects the drive.
The user then, hopefully, plugs that infected USB into an air-gapped computer unavailable to the CIA.
The malware does whatever it has been configured to carry out, and sends any data back to the CIA once it is plugged into the primary host again.
Once the malware has infected a target, Brutal Kangaroo sets up its own "custom covert network" within the air-gapped computers, and can collect files, survey the victim machines, launch its own executables, and more, according to one of the documents.
The malware can also delete a predetermined list of files, one of the documents adds.
One section of a user guide lays out problems that certain antivirus products have allegedly posed to the CIA malware.
Symantec's product supposedly generated a pop-up when the malware tried to automatically run, as did another product.
According to the guide, security vendor BitDefender blocked "ALL Execution Vectors."
(A presentation included in the cache includes a diagram that implies detection of the malware has, at least at one point, been generally low).
Famously, the Stuxnet attack, widely believed to be the work of American and Israeli intelligence and which targeted the Iranian nuclear program, also made use of infected USB drives.
In a court filing from earlier this year, the Department of Justice may have accidentally confirmed the authenticity of the CIA documents.
Back in April, building on information previously distributed by Wikileaks, researchers at cybersecurity firm Symantec identified 40 allegedly linked hacking operations around the world, including targets in government, financial, energy, aerospace, and natural resource sectors.

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Newsbeat Radio, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = riot
document number 1: 
London G20 Protest Riots – RBS Attacked, Mounted Riot Police Respond


Tomorrow is the G20 meeting in London, but anti-capitalist protesters got off to a good start today in the City (of London) with an attack on an RBS building.

During my lunch hour I strolled from Moorgate to the Bank of England.
Princes Street was blocked, so I went around Lothbury to Bartholomew Lane, leading to Threadneedle Street.
The protest was on Threadneedle St.
but people attacked the RBS building on the corner.
Mounted police then arrived to push the protesters back.

I was happily taking photos of the march on Threadneedle Street from the safety of Bartholomew Lane.
At about 1.30pm the protesters started getting a bit feisty and obkects were thrown, red smoke bombs were hurled and people started climbing on railings.
The focus quickly turned to an RBS building opposite the Bank of England (the BOE being like a fortress, the protesters did not stand a chance).
Soon a window was broken and protesters managed to enter the building.

Riot (or are they crowd control?)
police started pushing the protesters back, which forced more into Bartholomew Lane, which was still relatively safe.
The tide of the rioting masses ebbed and flowed for a while, until the crowd could no longer hold its position in Threadneedle.
During this time some cunning mounted police officers positioned themselves along the rear of Bartholomew Lane, leaving me (and a whole bunch of other onlookers) trapped between a wall of horse and a rioting mob.

Things were still relatively calm though, but the protesters moved towards the police, and the police commander shouted "visors down!
hold the line!".
They refused to let photographers out.
Things started getting hairy.
Luckily I overheard someone mention a gap in the scaffolding on the opposite side of the street, so I legged it over and made my way along an undercover pathway around the back of the riot police.
The horses were agitated by the time I passed them, and some were backing into the riot vans, shaking them all over the place.
It was only then I realised how damn big those horses are!

But I made my escape, and recorded the whole event on my Google G1 phone, uploaded the photos to Picasa using the Picasa application, and now blogging using WordPress (see how I managed to make it sound like an IT blog?).
Here’s a photo reel of my day.
The crowd shots from above are when the protesters were moving from Liverpool Street to Bank via London Wall.

See our full London City G20 Album Learn more about the London G20 summit



####
document number 2: 
Hours after peaceful Worcester protest ends, police in riot gear fire pepper spray as crowd throws rocks at officers, sets off fireworks



Editor’s note: This article has been updated to note that Worcester police used smoke grenades and pepperball rounds, not rubber bullets.


Hours after a peaceful protest had ended, police were in a stand-off with a group of people who marched into the Main South neighborhood of Worcester Monday night.
The group began marching down Main Street sometime around 11 p.m.

The group was met by police officers on Hammond Street, where they took a knee and chanted "Black Lives Matter" and held signs in front of a police vehicle.


Police outfitted in riot gear arrived on the scene and formed a barricade between Hammond and Main Streets.
The officers then began to move toward the crowd repeating, "Move back, Move back."


The crowd was dispersed in two separate directions with some heading up Hammond Street and others continuing down Main Street.

The crowd on Main Street later would start to set off fireworks and throw rocks toward the officers dressed in riot gear.
Glass bottles were thrown at police cruisers.
At one point, the bumper of a Worcester police cruiser caught on fire.
A person was seen lighting a fire in bushes in front of the Main Street Dunkin'.

People in the crowd shouted to the police, "Hands up, don’t shoot."

Police fired smoke grenades and pepperball rounds, which dispense oleoresin capsicum, the same ingredient found in pepper spray, into the crowd of about 70 people.

There were reports of people getting on top of the PennyWise Market on May Street.
One Clark University police cruiser had its windows smashed in.

Some participants claim police boxed in the group and gave them no outlet to leave.

Fireworks were still being set off in the streets as of midnight as police and the crowd remained in the street Tuesday morning.

A SWAT team arrived in the area at one point.

People could be seen being taken into custody by police.


Officers rushed to EbLens, a clothing and sneaker store, on Park Avenue for a report of looting.
At least one person was taken into custody there.

Merchandise from the store could be seen in the parking lot.

Around 12:40 a.m. Main Street had cleared out.
The police in riot gear lingered for a bit before leaving.


A peaceful protest where people gathered in solidarity over the death of George Floyd took place earlier Monday.
The Worcester Common was packed with thousands of people.
The group eventually made their way to the Worcester courthouse on Main Street where the protest continued.

At one point, police took a knee with the protesters.
The early evening event ended without any issues.

Riots broke out in major cities across the United States as people protested the death of Floyd.

In Boston, police arrested 53 people after violence erupted Sunday night.
The violence came after the organized protests ended in the city.

Floyd, a 46-year-old unarmed black man, died May 25 after a white Minneapolis police officer kneeled on his neck for more than eight minutes, even after he had passed out, according to authorities.
Derek Chauvin, the police officer, has since been charged with murder and manslaughter.



####
document number 3: 
Meet The Last Surviving Witness To The Tulsa Race Riot Of 1921


Update: Since this piece was published several people have reached out to tell us the story of Hal Singer.
At the time of the massacre, Hal Singer was just 18 months old.
His mother worked as a cook in wealthy white homes in Tulsa.
As the violence began, one of her employers helped Hal and his mother escape on a train to Kansas City.
Hal "Cornbread" Singer went on to become a successful jazz saxophonist and bandleader.
He is now 98 years old.


On May 31, 1921, six-year-old Olivia Hooker was home with her family in Tulsa, Okla., when a group of white men came through the backyard carrying torches.
Her mother quickly hid Olivia and her three siblings under the dining room table, covering them with a tablecloth and told them not to make a sound.

"It was a horrifying thing for a little girl who's only six years old," she told Radio Diaries, "trying to remember to keep quiet, so they wouldn't know we were there."

The men entered the house and began to destroy anything they could find of value.
They broke her father's record player and took an ax to her sister Irene's beloved piano before moving on to other homes and businesses in the community.

Before the events in May of 1921, the Greenwood district of Tulsa was a predominately African-American neighborhood, known for its thriving middle-class.
The main strip, Greenwood Avenue, was lined with successful black-owned businesses, including the Hooker family's store, which sold quality brand-named clothes.

"It was a neighborhood where you could be treated with respect," Hooker says.

Greenwood may have been a haven for African-Americans, but the state of Oklahoma had strict laws limiting the rights of black people.
Schools, hospitals, trains, stores, restaurants, even public phone booths were segregated and miscegenation was a felony.
Lynchings were not uncommon and by 1920, the Ku Klux Klan was reemerging in the state.

The riot begins

When Dick Rowland, a young black man, was accused of assaulting a young white woman in an elevator in May 1921, things escalated quickly.
He was arrested and word spread that white mobs were headed to the courthouse, intending to lynch him.

The mobs were met by a group of armed black men, many of whom were World War I veterans.
After a confrontation, shots were fired, and thus began a day-long assault on Greenwood.
In less than 24 hours, the white mobs destroyed more than 1,000 homes and businesses.
They set fire to schools, churches, libraries, and movie theaters, leveling entire city blocks.

"My father's store was destroyed," Hooker says.
"There was nothing left but one big safe.
It was so big they couldn't carry it away, so they had to leave it — in the middle of the rubble."


"Fires had been started by the white invaders soon after 1 o'clock and other fires were set from time to time.
By 8 o'clock practically the entire thirty blocks of homes in the negro quarters were in flames and few buildings escaped destruction.
Negroes caught in their burning homes were in many instances shot down as they attempted to escape."

--

The New York Times, June 2, 1921



Reports varied wildly.
Initial estimates put the death toll somewhere between 36 and 85.
One report, released by Maurice Willows who directed the American Red Cross relief efforts, estimated that as many as 300 people were killed.
Today, the Tulsa Race Riot is considered one of the worst incidents of racial violence in American history.

"

In all of my experience I have never witnessed such scenes as prevailed in this city when I arrived at the height of the rioting.
Twenty-five thousand whites, armed to the teeth, were ranging the city in utter and ruthless defiance of every concept of law and righteousness.
Motor cars, bristling with guns swept through your city, their occupants firing at will.'"


-- Adjutant General Charles J.
Barrett, The New York Times, June 3, 1921



As of June 1, 1921, an estimated 9,000 people were homeless.
Many left Tulsa, including the Hookers who moved to Topeka, Kan.
Others started to rebuild and the riots began to fade from public memory.

For decades, the events of 1921 were rarely discussed or taught in school.
But in 1971, Impact Magazine editor Don Ross published one of the first accounts of the race riots in nearly 50 years.
He went on to become a state representative and, along with State Senator Maxine Horner, is credited with bringing national attention to the buried history.

Ninety-seven years after the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921 took place, Oliva Hooker, 103, is thought to be the last surviving witness.


"Our parents tried to tell us, don't spend your time agonizing over the past," Olivia Hooker says.
"They encouraged us to look forward and think how we could make things better."

In 1945, Hooker became the first African-American woman to join the U.S. Coast Guard.
She went on to earn a doctorate degree in psychology and helped form the Tulsa Race Riot Commission in 1997 to investigate the massacre and make a case for reparations.
Dr. Hooker is now 103 years old and thought to be the last surviving witness to the Tulsa Race Riot of 1921.

This story was produced by Nellie Gilles of Radio Diaries along with Joe Richman, Sarah Kate Kramer, and edited by Deborah George and Ben Shapiro.
Special thanks to the

Tulsa Historical Society

and the

Greenwood Cultural Center

.
This story is the first in a new series from Radio Diaries and NPR called

Last Witness

, which features portraits of the last surviving witnesses to major historical events.
Send us your ideas for the series by using the hashtag #LastWitness.
To hear more stories from Radio Diaries, subscribe to their podcast at

www.radiodiaries.org

.



####
document number 4: 
Indonesian students clash with police in protests over new law


Riot police in Indonesia have clashed with protesters as thousands of students resumed demonstrations against a new law they say has crippled the country’s anti-corruption agency.

Authorities blocked streets leading to the parliament building in Jakarta, where 560 members of the house of representatives, whose terms ended on Monday, held their last session.

Clashes between rock-throwing students and riot police broke out on Monday evening when police tried to disperse the protesters, ranging from high school to university students, who attempted to reach parliament after calm had largely returned to the country’s capital over the past four days.

Protesters set fires to tyres and pelted police with rocks, petrol bombs and firecrackers near blocked streets.
Riot police responded by firing teargas and water cannons.



Indonesia's criminal code: what is it, why does it matter, and will it be passed?

Read more


Similar clashes also occurred in other Indonesian cities, including in West Java’s Bandung city and in Makassar, the capital of South Sulawesi province, where a student was badly injured on Friday after being accidentally hit by anti-riot armour.

A protest also turned violent in President Joko Widodo’s hometown of Solo city in Central Java, where an angry mob threw rocks at police, injuring at least four female officers.

The demonstrators are enraged that parliament passed the law reducing the authority of the corruption commission, a key body fighting endemic graft in the country.

Activists say the revision weakens the powers of one of the most credible public institutions in a country where the police and parliament are perceived as being widely corrupt.

They are also demanding the new lawmakers change articles in the proposed criminal code, including one that would criminalise a variety of sexual activities such a premarital sex.

The protests have grown since last week and turned violent in some cities, with the burning of police posts and public facilities such as a toll gate and bus stops.

At least three people, including two students in Kendari city on Sulawesi island, have died and several hundred were injured.

The death of the students sparked a national outcry, prompting Widodo to express his deep condolences and order the national police chief to conduct a thorough investigation.

The protests, which underline Indonesia’s challenge in changing its graft-ridden image, have threatened the credibility of Widodo, who recently was re-elected after campaigning for clean governance.

He faced down riots in May by supporters of the losing candidate, former Gen Prabowo Subianto, but the new protests are not associated with any particular party, and instead are led by students, who historically have been a driving force of political change.

The students are demanding that Widodo issue a government regulation replacing the new law on the corruption commission, known by its Indonesian abbreviation, KPK.
The anti-graft commission is frequently under attack by lawmakers who want to reduce its powers.

Widodo told reporters on Monday that the government would not forbid student demonstrations and called on protesters to avoid damaging public facilities.

Widodo said last Thursday that he was considering revoking the new anti-corruption law.
However, the idea was immediately opposed by members of his coalition in parliament who want to reduce the powers of the anti-graft agency.



####
document number 5: 
LA Riot Video Done By Students Last Year | Synergy Quantum Academy








####
document number 6: 
Riot in banlieue as school students protest against CPE


Between 300 - 500 pupils of the Eugene Delacroix High School had gathered for an anti-CPE demonstration.
Three vehicles were set fire to and a bus shelter was damaged in the clashes.
There was one arrest.
According to the police force, the incidents lasted 3 hours.

Drancy is located in Seine-Saint-Denis, a department in the north-western periphery of Paris where the wave of urban violence which struck the French suburbs, last November started.



####
document number 7: 
How to improve Richmond Police, protester interactions



RICHMOND, Va.
-- Following a weekend incident where a Richmond Police SUV pushed through a crowd of protesters, some of whom were blocking the vehicle, already simmering tensions between protesters and police in the city become more overt Sunday night.

A large group gathered outside Richmond Police headquarters facing a line of officers in riot gear.
At least one person was arrested, and police used pepper spray to disperse the crowd at times after officials cleared an unlawful assembly.

Former Richmond Sheriff C.T. Woody, who worked as a Richmond Police officer and homicide detective for 35 years, has been watching the events unfold from afar.
Woody said he fully backs the Black Lives Matter movements in Richmond and that city leaders need to take action.

"These young folks are not going to take what we older folks have taken and let go by.
They’re much smarter, they’re much wiser, and they don’t mind sacrificing.
You have to get their attention; you have to listen to them, and you have to do what’s right by them," Woody said.

The Saturday night SUV incident, Woody said, was an example of the eroding trust between many protesters and officers tasked with maintaining order.
Richmond Police said one of the officers in the SUV was assaulted through an open window, and Woody said given the circumstances, officers are trained to protect themselves as well.


"Most police officers are not trying to drive through a crowd.
They have an order, and they’re trying to stay away from the crowd.
They are there to protect and to serve," Woody said.
"The best thing for them to do was to use the car as a shield and try to get through the crowd as safely as they can without hurting anyone and also get themselves safely away from the situation."

Dr.
William Pelfrey, a professor of criminal justice and policing at VCU’s Wilder School, agreed the incident showed a distrust between protesters and police, but said the actions of the officers should be considered too.

"That police use of a vehicle didn’t represent a deadly threat.
But if the situation would have been reversed, it would have been justified for police to use deadly force against the driver.
That means it was a dangerous situation," Dr. Pelfrey said.
"I think that moment of the officers using their vehicle to push through a crowd says a lot about how people view authority figures right now, with a lack of trust and a lack of respect."

Dr. Pelfrey has studied protester and police interactions throughout American history.

"There were lots of riots and protests in the 60’s and 70’s, and the lessons that emerged from those protests and subsequent riots were that, when the police show up in heavy tactical gear, bad things happen," Dr. Pelfrey said.
"A protest means people want to talk.
They have something they need to say.
And when police show up in their riot gear, with their helmets and riot batons, then they’re sending the wrong dynamic."

Steve Helber/AP

Richmond Police Chief William Smith, left, is confronted by a protester as he attempts to address a large crowd in front of City Hall, Tuesday June 2, 2020, in Richmond, Va.
Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney apologized after police, the night before, lobbed tear gas at a group of peaceful demonstrators during a protest over the death of George Floyd, who died after being restrained by Minneapolis police officers on May 25.
(AP Photo/Steve Helber)


Both Woody and Pelfrey said officers facing stressful, tense situations on a daily basis contribute to the current climate.
Striking the balance between maintaining public safety and respecting the First Amendment rights of protesters can be a difficult task, they said.

"When protesters confront police, they’re viewing them as the arm of the authority, but the police really aren’t.
The police the protesters are talking to are line patrol officers with mid-level supervisors," Pelfrey said.
"As long as protesters remain calm, they’re going to have a forum for talking and to air their grievances.
But once the calm is gone, then police have a responsibility to maintain public safety."

Steve Helber/AP

Police in riot gear prepare to disperse a group of protesters as they march through downtown for a third night of unrest Sunday May 31, 2020, in Richmond, Va.
Gov.
Ralph Northam issued a curfew for this evening.
(AP Photo/Steve Helber)


Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney and the Richmond’s Commonwealth Attorney have promised investigations into any reported criminal acts by both protesters and police over the past several weeks.
Woody and Pelfrey said making that process as transparent as possible is the only way to start rebuilding community trust.

"We have to prioritize.
Get rid of the bad ones: yes.
Retrain: yes, always.
But you got to change.
No change; no progress," Woody said.

"If everything happens in a black box, where nobody really knows what happens, how the investigation proceeds, how the punishments or sanctions proceed, then they lose trust in the police," Dr. Pelfrey said.

The history of police reform is "replete" with moments of crisis.
He said the current moment reminds him in some ways of the L.A. protests and riots following the beating of Rodney King in 1991.
The reforms to the LAPD took years, he said.



####
document number 8: 
Stonewall Riots


The Stonewall Riots, also called the Stonewall Uprising, began in the early hours of June 28, 1969 when New York City police raided the Stonewall Inn, a gay club located in Greenwich Village in New York City.
The raid sparked a riot among bar patrons and neighborhood residents as police roughly hauled employees and patrons out of the bar, leading to six days of protests and violent clashes with law enforcement outside the bar on Christopher Street, in neighboring streets and in nearby Christopher Park.
The Stonewall Riots served as a catalyst for the gay rights movement in the United States and around the world.

Constant Raids at Gay Bars


The 1960s and preceding decades were not welcoming times for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) Americans.
For instance, solicitation of same-sex relations was illegal in New York City.

For such reasons, LGBT individuals flocked to gay bars and clubs, places of refuge where they could express themselves openly and socialize without worry.
However, the New York State Liquor Authority penalized and shut down establishments that served alcohol to known or suspected LGBT individuals, arguing that the mere gathering of homosexuals was "disorderly."

Thanks to activists’ efforts, these regulations were overturned in 1966, and LGBT patrons could now be served alcohol.
But engaging in gay behavior in public (holding hands, kissing or dancing with someone of the same sex) was still illegal, so police harassment of gay bars continued and many bars still operated without liquor licenses—in part because they were owned by the Mafia.

READ MORE: How the Mob Helped Establish NYC’s Gay Bar Scene

Gay Rights Before Stonewall


The first documented U.S. gay rights organization, The Society for Human Rights (SHR), was founded in 1924 by Henry Gerber, a German immigrant.
Police raids forced them to disband in 1925, but not before they had published several issues of their newsletter, "Friendship and Freedom," the country’s first gay-interest newsletter.
America’s first lesbian rights organization, The Daughters of Bilitis, was formed in San Francisco on September 21, 1955.

In 1966, three years before Stonewall, members of The Mattachine Society, an organization dedicated to gay rights, staged a "sip-in" where they openly declared their sexuality at taverns, daring staff to turn them away and suing establishments who did.
When The Commission on Human Rights ruled that gay individuals had the right to be served in bars, police raids were temporarily reduced.

READ MORE: What Happened at the Stonewall Riots?
A Timeline of the 1969 Uprising

Stonewall Inn


The crime syndicate saw profit in catering to shunned gay clientele, and by the mid-1960s, the Genovese crime family controlled most Greenwich Village gay bars.
In 1966, they purchased Stonewall Inn (a "straight" bar and restaurant), cheaply renovated it, and reopened it the next year as a gay bar.

Stonewall Inn was registered as a type of private "bottle bar," which did not require a liquor license because patrons were supposed to bring their own liquor.
Club attendees had to sign their names in a book upon entry to maintain the club’s false exclusivity.
The Genovese family bribed New York’s Sixth Police Precinct to ignore the activities occurring within the club.

Without police interference, the crime family could cut costs how they saw fit: The club lacked a fire exit, running water behind the bar to wash glasses, clean toilets that didn’t routinely overflow and palatable drinks that weren’t watered down beyond recognition.
What’s more, the Mafia reportedly blackmailed the club’s wealthier patrons who wanted to keep their sexuality a secret.

Nonetheless, Stonewall Inn quickly became an important Greenwich Village institution.
It was large and relatively cheap to enter.
It welcomed drag queens, who received a bitter reception at other gay bars and clubs.
It was a nightly home for many runaways and homeless gay youths, who panhandled or shoplifted to afford the entry fee.
And it was one of the few—if not the only—gay bar left that allowed dancing.

Raids were still a fact of life, but usually corrupt cops would tip off Mafia-run bars before they occurred, allowing owners to stash the alcohol (sold without a liquor license) and hide other illegal activities.
In fact, the NYPD had stormed Stonewall Inn just a few days before the riot-inducing raid.

The Stonewall Riots Begin


When police raided Stonewall Inn on the morning of June 28, it came as a surprise—the bar wasn’t tipped off this time.

Armed with a warrant, police officers entered the club, roughed up patrons, and, finding bootlegged alcohol, arrested 13 people, including employees and people violating the state’s gender-appropriate clothing statute (female officers would take suspected cross-dressing patrons into the bathroom to check their sex).

Fed up with constant police harassment and social discrimination, angry patrons and neighborhood residents hung around outside of the bar rather than disperse, becoming increasingly agitated as the events unfolded and people were aggressively manhandled.
At one point, an officer hit a lesbian over the head as he forced her into the police van— she shouted to onlookers to act, inciting the crowd to begin throw pennies, bottles, cobble stones and other objects at the police.

Within minutes, a full-blown riot involving hundreds of people began.
The police, a few prisoners and a

Village Voice

writer barricaded themselves in the bar, which the mob attempted to set on fire after breaching the barricade repeatedly.

The fire department and a riot squad were eventually able to douse the flames, rescue those inside Stonewall, and disperse the crowd.
But the protests, sometimes involving thousands of people, continued in the area for five more days, flaring up at one point after the

Village Voice

published its account of the riots.

READ MORE: 7 Surprising Facts About the Stonewall Riots and the Fight for LGBT Rights

Stonewall's Legacy


Though the Stonewall uprising didn’t start the gay rights movement, it was a galvanizing force for LGBT political activism, leading to numerous gay rights organizations, including the Gay Liberation Front, Human Rights Campaign, GLAAD (formerly Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation), and PFLAG (formerly Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays).

On the one-year anniversary of the riots on June 28, 1970, thousands of people marched in the streets of Manhattan from the Stonewall Inn to Central Park in what was then called "Christopher Street Liberation Day," America’s first gay pride parade.
The parade’s official chant was: "Say it loud, gay is proud."

In 2016, then-President Barack Obama designated the site of the riots—Stonewall Inn, Christopher Park, and the surrounding streets and sidewalks—a national monument in recognition of the area’s contribution to gay rights.

READ MORE: How Activists Plotted the First Gay Pride Parades

Sources


A History of Gay Rights in America.
CBS.
LGBTQ Activism: The Henry Gerber House, Chicago, IL.
NPS.gov.



####
document number 9: 
14 Incredible Works That Have Redefined Art in the 21st Century



The values and focus of 21st century art are just finding their footing.
So far there are echoes of the postmodern tradition, artistic movement emphasizes method over form and originality over technicality.
But there are also uniquely 21st century characteristics, like the growing artistic importance of sociopolitical consciousness and the effects of globalization on art.

For a crash course in the contemporary art scene, we gathered one work for every year between 2000-2014.
Looking towards the recent past of modern art, these are the pieces you should know.
Starting with 2000, here's the year-by-year retrospective:

1.
2000: Louise Bourgeois' "I Do, Undo, Redo"

Image Credit:

Blogspot


One of the world's great modern and contemporary art museums, the Tate Modern, opened in London in 2000.
There, famed French-American artist Bourgeois (1911-2010) took center stage in turbine hall with "I Do, Undo, Redo."

With the piece, Bourgeois digs into the issues of identity and self-reflection, a precursor to the themes that would become even more critical with the pending development of social media.
In "I Do, Undo, Redo," she forces the viewer to experience self-conscious anxiety, momentarily isolated under the mirrors and the searing spotlight of the public gaze.
It's a piece defined by remarkable foresight and immense talent.

2.
2001: Rafaël Rozendaal's "www.whitetrash.nl"

Image Credit:

Imgur


If anyone can be called "Internet famous," it's Rozendaal.
The Dutch-Brazilian artist and writer is most famous for his online art and websites, of which there are hundreds.

According to his personal site, www.whitetrash.nl was his first.
Even today, 13 years after it was built, the site embodies elements of the contemporary 20-something's approach to the Internet — interactive, humorous, thought-provoking.

Taken at face value, all of his sites are engaging and inane, a little like the reality TV of art.
The beauty of his work lies in the participation element.
It is very difficult to make the Internet an experiential art installation, but Rozendaal seems to have figured it out.

3.
2002: Cornelia Konrads' "Grass Works"


German artist Konrads is not very well known, but she should be.
Her 2002 piece "Grass Works" emphasizes some of the environmental and cultural concerns that have defined the past two decades.

Her site-specific earth installations build on the tradition that artists like Andy Goldsworthy established in the 1980s.
Her pieces play with gravity, in some ways rejecting the natural limitations of the materials that earlier land artists emphasized.
It's a sharp conceptual departure from other similar artists.

4.
2003: Dario Robleto's "Caught in Man's Amnesia"


Robleto's "sunny despair" (as described by Pulitzer Prize-winning art critic Holland Cotter) pervades his stunningly complex and vaguely gothic artwork.
"Caught In Man's Amnesia" is a collection of bullets made of melted and cast unused bullet casings from every American war.

After 9/11, war became a primary theme in Robleto's works.
This piece grapples with notions of war, peace, memory and salvation — not in a superficial way but with respect, historical context and awareness, sensitivity and grace.
Amid a seemingly endless rotation of wars and conflicts, Robleto's approach echoes the humanity and chaos of conflict.

5.
2004: Ron English's "MC Supersized"


American artist English's peculiar brand of subversive cultural commentary is intricately tied to the fluorescent aesthetics of American pop culture in the early noughties.
"MC Supersized" is one of English's most recognizable sculptures, in part because of its inclusion in Morgan Spurlock's documentary

Super Size Me

.

English reportedly coined the term "POPaganda" to describe his approach, and he describes "MC Supersized" as one of his "art toys."
In keeping with the POPaganda vision, it is available in many different colors, shapes and costumes, like a child's plastic toy.
This piece, like all of English's work, is rooted in street art and alternative culture.
"MC Supersized" helped establish both in the mainstream art consciousness.

6.
2005: Kehinde Wiley's "Napoleon Leading the Army over the Alps"


Wiley, a Nigerian-American painter, has become one of the premier artists of the 21st century.
"Napoleon Leading the Army Over the Alps" showcases the style for which Wiley became famous.

It reinterprets traditional oil portraiture to raise questions of race and societal class.
This immense piece hangs in the lobby of the Brooklyn Museum in New York and helped established Wiley as a major player in the contemporary art scene.

7.
2006: Cy Twombly's "Untitled (Blooming: A Scattering of Blossoms and Other Things)"


Twombly, who passed away three years ago, was one of the art world's heavy hitters.
His paintings and drawings had immeasurable influence on the abstract and expressionist artists who followed him, and laid the groundwork for artists like Julie Mehretu.

Twombly's series of peonies emerged around 2006, and they stand apart from his other works for their vibrant color and solidness.
These are present paintings, the art of a man working toward a more experiential abstract expressionism.
They are large and lovely — not an unwelcome imposition on the viewers' space.

8.
2007: Julie Mehretu's "Black City"

Image Credit:

WikiArt


Mehretu, an Ethiopian artist, creates large-scale, gestural, multi-layered, multimedia compositions that feel like abstract maps of cities.
"Black City" is typical, gorgeous Mehretu — architectural, structured, speeding.
It's an expanse of details, notes and movements.
She is the heir to Pollock's throne.

Mehretu has become one of the top abstract painters in the world since her career exploded in the late noughties.
Her work is seen as a response to the frenetic pace of modern life and the growing inter-connectivity.

9.
2008: Shepard Fairey's "HOPE" Poster


Already an icon of the street art scene for his OBEY series, Fairey established himself firmly in art history with his campaign posters for then-presidential candidate Barack Obama in 2008.
These "HOPE" posters were not endorsed by the Obama campaign, as they were posted illegally, but they became the campaign's de facto imagery.
The original version of the posters said "PROGRESS" rather than "HOPE," Fairey said, but the campaign requested the change.

Fairey's "HOPE" poster is one of the first examples of art to go viral.

10.
2009: Mickalene Thomas' "Something You Can Feel"


It's labeled as a "multi-media installation," but in layman's terms, it's a living room.
"Something You Can Feel" is one of American artist Mickalene Thomas' first installations of an entire room, this one decorated like a '70s den.
Again, we see experiential art taking center stage alongside those questions of identity so common in contemporary art.

Thomas is known not for her installations, but for large-scale portraits of black women that challenge ideas of femininity, sexuality, adornment and race.
In this piece, we see her begin to address the material culture that surrounds the subjects of her paintings.
Conceptually, it's an interesting step in these contemporary identity explorations, and one to pay attention to in the future.
If you're looking for an artist to watch, Thomas is it.

11.
2010: Martynka Wawrzyniak's "Lipstick (four)"


Polish artist Wawrzyniak does not shy from the camera.
"Lipstick (four)" is part of her "4 Sale" series, which deconstructs and questions videos and photographs of women.
Wawrzyniak is one of four women photographed for the series.
Her work digs invasively deep into her own physical, mental and emotional identity.
She's interested in what it means to be a woman — and what it means to be an individual.

Two things are particularly interesting about this piece of art.
First, its distribution.
This piece is available for free, for everyone.
That's radical.
Second, the humor.
This kind of exaggerated, seriocomic humor still feels fresh and current.
Hopefully there will be more sardonic levity in art in the future.

12.
2011: Ai Weiwei's "Sofa in White"


In 2011, the Chinese government imprisoned Chinese artist and outspoken dissident Weiwei on bogus claims for 81 days.
He was very open about the whole episode, and it drew international attention to the Chinese government's draconian limitations on individual freedoms.
Since his imprisonment, Weiwei has become a household name and an icon of free speech.

While many of his works are now well known, these sofas were released during 2011 as part of an outdoor installation in Switzerland.
They display Weiwei's formal attention to detail and to realism, while also showing the kind of calculated whimsy that sets his work apart.

13.
2012: Pussy Riot's "Punk Prayer - Mother of God, Chase Putin Away!"


Pussy Riot, that infamous Russian feminist punk collective, attracted international attention in 2012 with their music video "Punk Prayer - Mother of God, Chase Putin Away!"
Formed in 2011, Pussy Riot is known for staging and taping guerrilla protests and posting them online.
Following this music video, two members of the group were sentenced to two years in prison, which was widely criticized by Western media.

This particular piece of shock art is one of Pussy Riot's most popular and is a compelling fusion of trends across art, politics and society.
In contemporary art, we are continuing to see more fluid boundaries and looser expectations for what art can be.

14.
2013: Yayoi Kusama's "Infinity Mirrored Room — The Souls of Millions of Light Years Away"


Being the installation that spawned a thousand selfies detracted not one whit from renowned Japanese artist Kusama's truly magical exhibit at David Zwirner gallery in 2013.
The "Infinity Mirrored Room - The Souls of Millions of Light Years Away" was everything it looked to be and much more.
Though the show included four major works by Kusama, including a strong collection of paintings, the jewel in the crown was the "Infinity Mirrored Room."

This piece was a landmark in contemporary art.
It is a very recent example of art gone viral, driven in part by social media and in part by youth engagement with this kind of immersive, experiential art.
When considered with MoMA's "Rain Room," 2013 was a very good year for installation art.
Let's hope 2014 is even better.

Correction: An earlier version of this article misspelled Jackson Pollock's name.



####
document number 10: 
The petrol bomb’s incendiary – and uncertain – history


Incendiaries of varying complexity have been used in warfare since ancient times.


The petrol bomb – or "Molotov cocktail" – is an iconic symbol of 20th-century political violence.
Simple, cheap and effective, it has become a staple feature of protest, riot and rebellion; a weapon of choice for the discontented masses.
But what are its origins, and who can be credited with its invention?

This is a question with no simple answer.
Incendiaries of varying complexity have been used in warfare since ancient times.
Indeed, the use of fire as weapon is referenced among the earliest books of the Bible.
It should come as no surprise then, that the petrol bomb has many ancestors, with various earthenware incendiary projectiles recorded in use as early as the 9th century BC.

Looking to more recent times, it is clear that the petrol bomb also has more immediate forerunners in the 19th century.
At the very least, the basic concept was prefigured in the spectre of the Pétroleuses, an imaginary body of working-class women accused of starting the fires that devastated Paris in the final days of the commune in 1871.

Descriptions of these phantom arsonists typically spoke of bottles of petrol and burning rags being thrown through cellar windows.
For the most part, the fires had actually been started by the soldiers of the commune, using more traditional methods of arson.

Jes


Nevertheless, the petrol bomb as we know it today – a glass bottle or jar, filled with a simple incendiary mixture, and fixed with a basic fuse or wick to facilitate ignition upon breakage – is commonly believed to have originated during the Spanish Civil War (1936–39), where it was used by both nationalists and republicans as an anti-tank weapon.

Those early examples were crude and remarkably unstable.
As one English veteran of the International Brigade later commented: "At least 10% of those who try these nasty things are likely to burn themselves quite badly."

A more refined, mass-produced, version was subsequently developed by the Finnish Army for use against soviet tanks during the Winter War (1939–40).
Here, it attracted more widespread attention, and earned an almost mythical status in the narrative of Finland’s surprise victory over the Red Army.

This was also the conflict in which it gained the nickname "Molotov cocktail", a mocking reference to the then soviet foreign minister, Vyacheslav Molotov.

C-Monster


Thereafter, the concept quickly spread.
In 1940, the British started work on a version with a self-igniting mixture for use by the home guard.
In the 1950s, it was again employed against the Red Army by anti-communist resistance groups, most notably during the Hungarian Revolution (1956).
Since then, its frequent replication has seen it pass into the realm of common knowledge.

Yet this is not so much an origin story as a narrative of how the petrol bomb has become embedded in popular consciousness.
Indeed, it is clear that the device – in all its fundamental aspects – was in use much earlier than the Spanish Civil War.

A case in point is the Irish revolution (1916–23), where it may have been in use as early as May 1920.
That month, members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) used bottles of petrol and paraffin to set fire to a police barracks in Limerick.
But although some of those involved in the attack later likened their actions to the use of Molotov cocktails, this is somewhat misleading.

Leckey Road, Derry, Northern Ireland by Femke Soontiens.


There is little to suggest that these projectiles carried a fuse or wick.
Rather, they were used to spread accelerant across the roof.
This became a common tactic thereafter.

By 1922, there is irrefutable evidence of the use of petrol bombs by the IRA; this time along the newly created Irish border.
Contemporary documents reveal that local units – under the leadership of future Irish politician and international statesman Frank Aiken – had evolved their own form of the now familiar device, and were using it regularly in operations ranging from sectarian attacks on civilian homes to ambushes against the police and military.

It was especially valued for its ability to "make an oven of an armoured car" while avoiding the sort of civilian casualties that could result from the use of conventional explosives.

The novelty of the concept is clear from a painstaking third-party description of the device submitted to Aiken’s superior officers in September 1922:

It consists of a bottle containing a mixture – ½ petrol, ½ paraffin, surrounded by a rubber band which holds in place a piece of fuse (4 sec) at either end of which is a safety match head.
One end of the fuse is lighted and by the time the bottle strikes the objective the other end ignites causing the mixture to go on fire.


Riot police dodge petrol bombs thrown by protesters outside the Greek Parliament during a demonstration in central Athens, Greece, March 2010.


Although improvised incendiaries were nothing new to the IRA, their past efforts had tended to be more sophisticated, employing complex chemical mixtures and intricate hand-grenade constructions.

Whereas the contrasting simplicity of Aiken’s petrol bomb should have made it an asset, in reality it only served to marginalise it.
His superiors simply did not understand the device:

I doubt that it will have such an effect on an armoured car.
What is to prevent the bottle breaking before the mixture takes fire?


Consequently, there were no attempts to encourage its use beyond Aiken’s unit, and it quickly fell from memory when the conflict ended in 1923.

This surely is only one of many largely forgotten episodes in the history of the petrol bomb.
And therein lies the difficulty of the question posed at the outset of this article.

Something so simple has undoubtedly been "invented" many times over.

Over the coming months, we’ll be running pieces looking at the history and nature of violence.



####
document number 11: 
Riots in Greece : the best photos


The 2010–2012 Greek protests are a series of demonstrations and general strikes taking place across Greece.
The protests, which began on 5 May 2010, were sparked by plans to cut public spending and raise taxes asausterity measures in exchange for a €110 billion bail-out, aimed at solving the 2010–2011 Greek debt crisis.
Three people were killed in the 5 May protests, one of the largest in Greece since 1973.
On 25 May 2011, anti-austerity protestors organized by the Direct Democracy Now!
movement, known as theIndignant Citizens Movement, started demonstrating in major cities across Greece.
This second wave of demonstrations proved different from the years before in that they are not partisan and began through peaceful means.
Some of the protests later turned violent, particularly in the capital city of Athens.
Sparked by the 2011 Spanish Protests, these demonstrations were organized entirely using social networking sites, which earned it the nickname "May of Facebook".
The demonstrations and square sit-ins were officially ended when municipal police removed demonstrators from Thessaloniki's White Tower square on 7 August 2011.
On 29 June 2011, violent clashes occurred between the riot police and protesters as the Greek parliament voted to accept the EU's austerity requirements.
Accusations of police brutality were reported by international media such as the BBC, The Guardian, CNN iReport and the New York Times as well as Amnesty International.
The Athens Prosecutor agreed to an investigation into accusations of excessive use of tear gas, as well as the alleged use of other expired and carcinogenic chemical substances.
The investigation is currently under way.

Source : Wikipedia

All photography below are copyrighted by their authors – Click on photos to see each license.
Thumbnail photography is under CC Licence by Sotiris Farmakidis

#1


By Andreas Tsam

#2


By makisraf

#3


By Bamako Brad

#4


By mkhalili

#5


By Timos L

#6


By Iason Hatzitheodorou

#7


By Yiannis Kourtoglou

#8


By wisepig

#9


By alexandros_M

#10


By Noumenorian

comments



####
document number 12: 
‘I Made Molotov Cocktails’




Kiev

— "I made Molotov cocktails," says Sophiia Brovchenko, a sweet 19-year-old girl who describes mixing jellied petrol, chemicals, stones and red pepper in bottles during the worst days of Ukraine’s Maidan Revolution.

"The guy who explained to me [how to make the Molotov cocktails] said, ‘Look at those buildings, see those snipers?
They usually aim for us because they know we’re making cocktails, but the bullets usually ricochet.’
I was like, ‘That’s comforting.’
. .
.
If you divide the job correctly, there were like 20 people, even more, [on the assembly line].
There were some reckless guys smoking next to the cocktails, and we were like, ‘Are you insane?!’"
Brovchenko recalls, adding that for weeks, she was afraid to venture near the bonfires at Maidan Nealezhnosti; the smell of petrol clung to her long red hair and clothing, she says, and she was afraid she’d accidentally immolate.

The scene Brovchenko paints is incongruous with the bubbly teenager sitting across from me.
She’s just begun her collegiate studies, she says, and she adores F.
Scott Fitzgerald, though it puzzles her that such a beautiful writer could support the communists.
She has an easy smile, favors red lipstick, and she looks like a Brooklyn hipster in her short skirt and knee-high stockings.
Only her Carhartt-style boots hint at her more rugged days at Maidan Nezalezhnosti.

As Ukraine prepares for possible war, it is vastly outnumbered and under-armed.
Though Russia wouldn’t be able to mobilize its entire military against Ukraine, it has four times the soldiers, six times the combat aircrafts, and more than 48 times the military budget.
Meanwhile, there’s ample reason to suspect that some in the Ukrainian military, from the foot soldiers to the top brass, actually sympathize with Russia.

But winning a military victory and claiming Ukrainian territory is one thing; occupying and maintaining it is another, and Russia may face a formidable challenge in Ukrainians like Brovchenko, who learned combat skills during the revolution at Maidan Nezalezhnosti, says Paul Floyd, a military analyst with the global intelligence firm Stratfor.

"What you’re talking about there is insurgent-like activities — guerilla warfare," Floyd says.
"Our analysis in general would be that while in a conventional sense, Russia can roll over Ukraine, it may have a harder time holding it. .
.
.
That’s where civilians can really kind of add to the fight."

Armed opposition to Russia would have strong ideological backing.
The same teenagers and twenty-somethings who have combat skills have had to reckon with some heavy concepts, including the right to overthrow a despot, and whether violence can be justified as a means of self-defense during revolution.

Brovchenko says the use of Molotov cocktails became justified when the

berkut

, Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych’s riot police, began using deadly violence against the protestors, including guns.
She says she is ready to resurrect her Molotov-cocktail-making skills if the Russians invade and the Ukrainian military needs help.

"Russia is an empire," Brovchenko says.
"It wants to have colonies.
It wants to invade more and more territories. .
.
.
I hope we will avoid war — it’s Europe, it’s the 21

st

Century — but when 100 people died in [Maidan Nezalezhnosti], I couldn’t believe it either.
We should hope that everything is alright, but we have to prepare."

Nevertheless, of the Molotov cocktails that went unused after Yanukovych fled to Russia, Brovchenko says: "I’m glad that I made weapons that were not used, because I would feel bad for those deaths.
I always thought that I didn’t want to be used in someone else’s game.
Even the riot police, those people are humans, they have families, and they are not even close to the authorities. .
.
.
But you know that a bottle you make may save someone’s life [when used defensively]."

Halyna Tanay, a 23-year-old Kiev woman, says she’s also ready to use the emergency-medical skills she learned at Maidan Nezalezhnosti if her country needs her.
During the revolution, Yanukovych’s police were seizing the wounded from their hospital beds.
Some were imprisoned, but others simply disappeared, so the demonstrators arranged secret hospitals in churches and homes.

These secret hospitals quickly raised enough money to buy state-of-the-art equipment, and doctors and nurses volunteered.
Sometimes, they were able to provide more sophisticated care in the secret hospitals than in the official city ones, Tanay says.

"Things the government couldn’t do in years, we did in weeks," she says.
"It just shows that if you want to do something, you can do it."

Those who participated in the Maidan revolution have kept the medical equipment, and they also now have a better sense of how to organize and administer emergency hospitals.

"Now, we have a real war in East Ukraine, and we also don’t know what will happen tomorrow," Tanay says.
"There, it’s still dangerous.
That’s why we can’t relax.
We are waiting for [the Russians] ever day, and if [our troops] need some treatment, we can help. .
.
.
I hope it won’t be needed.
Still, we have to be ready for that. .
.
.
Of course, war is worse than revolution, but now we understand what to do, and we are ready. "

During the Maidan revolution, Ukrainians united to prevail against a domestic threat to their freedom.
Now, Putin’s aggression is interrupting their nation-building process.
But Tanay says the way people were able to work together at Maidan Nezalezhnosti gives her hope that she will someday live in a stable democracy.

"In Ukraine, we [now] know that if the government cannot do it, we should do it," she says.
"Thank God we understand.
Maybe that’s the first step to changing the system."

— Jillian Kay Melchior writes for

National Review

as a Thomas L.
Rhodes Fellow for the Franklin Center.
She is also a senior fellow at the Independent Women’s Forum.



####
document number 13: 
When, exactly, do protests become riots?



Media coverage focused on "thugs" can distract from broader concerns

Heather O'Connell | July 16, 2015



Police line the streets of Baltimore the night of April 28.
Photo via flickr/ 87films

Just two months ago, national attention was squarely on Baltimore and the rising tension between black communities and police.

The death of Freddie Gray at the hands of six Baltimore cops – now facing criminal charges – was one of a slew of similar incidents.
African-American men in Cleveland, New York, North Charleston, Los Angeles and Ferguson, in recent months, have all died at the hands of police under questionable circumstances.

But the riots that emerged in Baltimore focused on even broader issues of income inequality and a lack of opportunities that plague some communities – especially black communities – like the one Freddie Gray called home.

Yet today, that discussion seems to have quieted.

Our nation’s short attention span does not bode well for the emergence of future riotous protests.
These events are the result of the built-up tensions and unmet needs of disenfranchised people.
The longer we wait to address their underlying causes, the more desperate and passionate the next response may be.

What surveys tell us


It would seem difficult to blame anyone for being unhappy – to say the least – about prolonged disadvantage that is met with little substantive response.
Yet many people did blame the protesters in Ferguson, Baltimore and elsewhere – or at least failed to see the underlying causes of the protests.

Only 25 percent of American adults polled in a recent Rasmussen Reports telephone survey said it was primarily "legitimate outrage" that prompted the demonstrations in Baltimore.
A striking 63 percent preferred to describe the events as "mostly criminals taking advantage of the situation."

Perhaps not surprisingly, this division shifts when considering black and white adults separately.
While 55 percent of blacks polled considered the Baltimore events a result of legitimate outrage, 68 percent of whites saw the same events differently, as being mostly about opportunistic criminal activity.

In a different time and in response to different events, the story remains the same.

After a series of displays of unrest in the 1960s across several major cities, including Detroit and Newark, researchers conducted a survey to learn what blacks and whites in 15 cities across the U.S. thought about these "disturbances".
[1]

In 1968, only 40 percent of the white sample in the survey of 15 cities identified inequality or discriminatory treatment as the main cause of the riots.
Responses related to the primary role of particular groups or leaders, and to "undesirables" or troublemakers, made up the second- and third-largest percentages of the white response – 20 percent and 15 percent – respectively.

In contrast, an overwhelming 69 percent of the black respondents immediately identified issues related to inequality as the main cause of the riots.
Other responses comprised only a small percentage of the sample (and only 2 percent first mentioned particular groups or leaders).

Similarly, an ABC News poll in April 1992 sought to gauge public opinion about the events that led to and transpired after the "not guilty" verdict was given for the police officers in the Rodney King case.
[2]

In that survey, there’s a marked difference in the extent to which the white and black samples believed that violent demonstrations were the only real way to get national attention.
Only 39 percent of the white sample agreed with that idea, while 78 percent of blacks agreed.

The differences in how the demonstrations are explained suggest there is a social disconnect in understanding the issues at stake to protesters.

Media portrayal betrays real issues


How the media treats protest events could be centrally involved in shaping this social division in perceptions of protests.

Referencing continued misunderstanding of the cause of Baltimore riots, basketball legend and

Time

columnist Kareem Abdul-Jabbar wrote in May:

"What’s even more frustrating for African-Americans across America witnessing the events is the blatant attempt of some in the media to portray this as (1) the result of ‘thugs’ who want to exploit Gray’s death to stock up on some free TVs and (2) an anomaly that doesn’t represent America."


Despite empirical evidence that suggests riots are in response to systemic inequalities that have been left unattended, the media often ignore that connection.
Instead of discussing the root causes of riots, coverage frequently focuses on discussing the appropriateness of the violent protest.

Recent research argues that a disconnected and decontextualized media portrayal of riots is one of the reasons why we, the public, move on quietly after these major events, often failing to enact economic reforms protesters call for.

Similar in sentiment,

Time

columnist Darlena Cunha wrote:

"We wish to seclude the incident and the people involved.
To separate it from our history as a nation, to dehumanize the change agents because of their bad and sometimes violent decisions – because if we can separate the underlying racial tensions that clearly exist in our country from the looting and rioting of select individuals, we can continue to ignore the problem."


We limit the potential impact of these recent events when we ignore their root causes and disregard them for senseless violence rather than legitimate protests.

The social impact of riotous protest


Riots provide an outlet for those who have little other political recourse.
Being loud collectively is how they gain a voice.

They are the last resort of people who the above mentioned columnists describe as "marginalized," "disenfranchised," and "helpless."

Unfortunately, despite the intentions of those who become involved in riotous protests, the broader public seems to respond to them negatively.
And this may limit their effectiveness in encouraging social change.

Consistent with the results from the surveys presented above, recent research conducted on the public response to the 2011 riots in England suggests that those events increased the distance individuals’ felt between themselves and the groups most involved in the riots in the year immediately following the event.

The catalyst for those riots – similar to the ones in the U.S. – was police involvement in the fatal shooting of Mark Duggan, a young black man.
Demonstrations in the victim’s home community, Tottenham, turned violent as frustration mounted.

Although the increase in social distance and subsequent prejudice directed towards disenfranchised groups eventually waned in England, mention of the riot continued to prompt prejudice-inducing effects even long-after the events.

This suggests that riots may be counterproductive from the perspective of the rioters, especially when it comes to their impact on public opinion.

In contrast to this possibility, other research suggests that

protests

are in fact effective in generating change.
But what is the real difference between disruptive protests and riots if both convey the need to address a pressing social issue?

Will presentations of protests evolve?


Given the role of media in shaping our perceptions of an event, some groups, most notably Brave New Films, are bringing attention to disparities in how media outlets describe events.
The filmmakers and advocates have highlighted the dramatically different language used to characterize protests involving black people and sports riots involving white people.

In addition to responding to this call for change, the work of criminal justice lecturer Carly Lightowlers suggests that we need to contextualize stories about riots.
Her work urges us to consider the bigger picture and to remember that riots are extremes acts taken only to convey what has been repeatedly brushed aside by the powers-that-be.

Challenging our media outlets to do better helps address the negative perceptions of riots, though it doesn’t speak to what we should do to reduce the actual causes of the riots – an issue that England has tried to address using an inquiry panel that made suggestions for how to reduce the chances of a repeat event.
Yet change in our media coverage (and consumption) may be critical to helping us acknowledge that there are problems to be addressed in the first place.
Without that, even good panel suggestions can go unheeded.

The repeated occurrence of major riotous protest – at regular intervals, I might add – suggests that there is more to the events than some have been willing to admit.

Consider several of the most infamous periods of unrest: the 1919 Chicago race riot, the 1943 Detroit race riot, the 1967 riots, the riots after the Rodney King verdict in 1992, and the most recent events in Ferguson and Baltimore in 2014-15.
Each was separated by an average of 24 years.
Let’s not wait to see if the next period of unrest will come even sooner.

[1] Campbell, Angus, and Howard Schuman.
Racial Attitudes in Fifteen American Cities, 1968.
ICPSR03500-v2.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1997.
http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR03500.v2

[2] ABC News/Washington Post.
ABC NEWS/WASHINGTON POST LOS ANGELESBEATINGPOLL, APRIL1992.
Radnor, PA: Chilton Research Services [producer], 1992.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 1993.
2008-07-31.
http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR09941.v1




####
document number 14: 
St.
Petersburg roommates accused of making, testing Molotov cocktail


Abraham Naveed Quraishi, 26, left, and Seanfrancis Kavanaugh Ziegenbein, 23, right, face charges of making or discharging a destructive device, according to St.
Petersburg police.


ST.
PETERSBURG — Two roommates are accused of assembling and testing a Molotov cocktail during the early days of the Black Lives Matter protests, according to St.
Petersburg police.

The charges were uncovered because one of the men, 26-year-old Abraham Naveed Quraishi, was arrested on a firearms charges during a June 3 protest.
Police later searched his phone, which investigators say uncovered video evidence that the men built and used the explosive device.

The videos also implicate Quraishi’s roommate, Seanfrancis Kavanaugh Ziegenbein, 23, police said.

Quraishi was arrested July 28 on charges of terrorist activity and making or discharging a destructive device, police said.
Ziegenbein was arrested Aug.
19 on a charge of making or discharging a destructive device.

Quraishi was first arrested the night of June 3 as officers asked a group of 30 protesters to leave First Avenue N so they could re-open the road outside St.
Petersburg Police headquarters, police said.

He was accused of throwing a 40mm foam baton round, or crowd-control weapon, at St.
Petersburg Police Chief Anthony Holloway and a group of officers, the agency said.
Officers spotted a gun in Quraishi,’s waistband, and he was accused of fighting them when he was arrested on several charges.
The gun was loaded and Quraishi does not have a concealed carry permit, police say.
He was freed June 4 after posting $110,000 bail.

A search warrant was obtained for his phone, and the arrest report says officers discovered a number of videos filmed days before his June 3 arrest.
The videos show the "construction" of a Molotov cocktail; someone testing the explosive device; Quraishi holding a rifle outside police headquarters with the caption "stay home;" driving by the old police building, displaying a weapon and using the caption "thinking about;" pointing a weapon at an unmarked police vehicle; driving by the St.
Pete Pier with a rifle and Molotov cocktail in the car; and videos of Quraishi performing "reconnaissance from high vantage points" around police headquarters.

After his arrest, Quraishi called his uncle from jail June 5 and asked him to tow his car from outside police headquarters, the report said.
It was towed June 6 to Pinellas Park, and on June 8, it was searched by Pinellas Park police officers.

Inside, police found what they believe to be the Molotov cocktail seen in one of the videos.
The arrest report says "there is reason to believe the defendant was going to discharge the device."
He was freed Aug.
7 after posting $100,000 bail.

Ziegenbein is the man seen in the video testing the explosive device, according to St.
Petersburg police.
He is accused of throwing the Molotov cocktail in the parking lot of Vertical Ventures at 116 18th St.
S.
Remnants of the device were found by the owner.
Ziegenbein was freed from the county jail on Aug.
20 after posting $15,000 bail.

Quraishi also faces felony charges from his June arrest — carrying a concealed firearm in the commission of a felony, inciting a riot, and four counts of resisting an officer with violence.

Both men have pleaded not guilty.



####
document number 15: 
The soundtrack of this year’s Hong Kong protests marks a somber turn from the Umbrella Movement


Music for Hong Kong’s troubled soul.


On the first night of the Umbrella Movement on Sept.
28, 2014, I watched thousands of protesters sit on the road facing a phalanx of riot police singing the Cantopop anthem "Boundless Ocean, Vast Skies" made famous by Hong Kong band Beyond.

Almost exactly five years later, in the midst of ongoing protests that have rocked Hong Kong for over one hundred days, I stood in the atrium of the luxury Landmark mall as a crowd of office workers gathered to sing "Glory to Hong Kong."
The somber march, composed just a few weeks ago, is already being referred to by some protesters as Hong Kong’s "national anthem" as disillusionment grows with the idea the city’s unique character and freedoms can be preserved within China.


As Hong Kong experiences its second mass protest movement in five years, the contrast between the two movements is perhaps nowhere as striking as in their soundtracks.
Music played a central role in 2014’s Umbrella Movement, which began five years ago this week in protest at Beijing’s offer of universal suffrage on the condition that candidates pass muster with a committee of 1,200 business and pro-China voters.
The 79-day occupation of the city’s central business districts got its name from protesters using umbrellas to defend against pepper spray and tear gas.

As well as the Beyond anthem, another song—"Raise the Umbrellas"—was written especially for the movement by Cantopop composer Lo Hiu-pan, and recorded by a number of pop stars who supported the movement including Denise Ho, who has since become one of Hong Kong’s leading political activists.
During Umbrella Movement rallies, Shiu Ka-chun, a social worker who acted as master-of-ceremonies of the Admiralty-occupied zone’s "main stage" and who was subsequently jailed for his role in the protests, would lead the crowd in singing both songs.
The scene, a sea of illuminated mobile phone lights, sometimes looked more like a Cantopop concert than a political rally.

The songs were optimistic and upbeat, reflecting the utopian spirit of the movement, perhaps best summed up in a line adorning a banner at Admiralty taken from John Lennon’s "Imagine," another song popular during the Umbrella Movement: "You may say I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only one."

Even in the rare moments of conflict, the music was playful.
When pro-government antagonists entered the occupied areas and began haranguing the crowd, protesters would surround them and sing "Happy Birthday!"
The collective singing of the cheerful ditty—which apparently started thanks to a well-timed accident (pdf)—would drown out the attack and defuse a potentially violent situation with humor and absurdity.

Five years later, music has also been central to 2019’s summer of discontent—what I have called the "Hard Hat Revolution" to 2014’s "Umbrella Revolution"—but in keeping with the darker tone of this protest movement, the music has also taken a darker, at times almost funereal, turn.

"The Cantopop ballads of the Umbrella Movement do not really fit with the tense atmosphere in the protest space."

This reflects the change in protest methods from the Umbrella Movement to today, according to Winnie W.C.
Lai, ethnomusicologist at the University of Pennsylvania who has researched Hong Kong protest music.
"Instead of peaceful occupation, protesters now ‘fight back’ whenever the police escalate their use of force.
The Cantopop ballads of the Umbrella Movement do not really fit with the tense atmosphere in the protest space."

In addition, Lai argues, music has gone from being largely expressive during the Umbrella Movement, a way for protesters to "feel good among themselves situated in their utopian community," to being more utilitarian.
This summer’s protest songs "have rather clear functions and purposes that are directly related to the people’s political will and action," says Lai.

This was the case with "Sing Hallelujah to the Lord," a Christian hymn composed in 1974 that became an early theme song of the current movement, which began in June in opposition to a proposed bill that would have allowed suspects to be sent to mainland China for trial.
That month, protesters gathered at the protest frontlines outside government headquarters and sang the hymn in rounds, sometimes for hours at a time.
Those leading the singing were initially Christian protesters, according to Dr. Ting Guo, a religious studies expert in the gender studies program at the University of Hong Kong.
"Later, because of the popularity of the song, and how catchy it is, it became an anthem of the movement, so everyone would be singing along."


Christian protesters say that they sang the song to encourage peace and non-violence.
"It is a very soothing, very calming hymn.
It provided a relief to the tension at the front lines of the protests," says Guo.
However as the months have worn on, the song seems to have been abandoned at the same pace as adherence to the policy of non-violence.

In recent months, as protesters have clashed violently with police, the underlying beat has been the "death rattle" of protesters beating their makeshift shields, road signs and traffic barriers.
The protesters appear to have learned the tactic from police, who bang their truncheons against their riot shields as they advance to intimidate those in their path.
In the hands of the protesters, the drumming serves to rally spirits as the tear gas grenades and rubber bullets pop around them.

Yet, in keeping with Hong Kong protesters’ seemingly limitless talent for satire and memes, there has also been room for some musical levity.
Remixers recently deconstructed and auto-tuned a speech by entertainment figure Maria Cordero at a pro-government rally and combined it with the hit song "Chandelier" by international pop artist Sia to create an anti-police anthem, the chorus of which roughly translates as "Ah!
Dirty cops!"
The song quickly became an online viral sensation, and at subsequent protests the primal scream of "Ah!"
is met with a crowd responding in full-throated chorus, "Dirty cops!," providing a moment of both humor and catharsis.

Another song, "Do you hear the people sing?," has been one of the few songs that has seemed successfully to cross over from the Umbrella Movement to today.
With the massed bodies and voices defending the barricades of the occupied zones during the Umbrella Movement, the song from the hit Broadway musical

Les Misérables

was perhaps an obvious choice.
But in the desperate atmosphere of these months, the song takes on a new significance—although it would be best not to dwell on the ultimate fate of those who defended the barricades in Paris in 1832.
(Spoiler alert: the song performed in the same cafe later in the musical is called "Empty chairs at empty tables.")


This new somber, almost martial, tone is most obvious in the latest addition to Hong Kong’s protest music repertoire, "Glory to Hong Kong."
Composed by a local Hong Kong composer who has identified himself only as "Thomas," with the lyrics posted and workshopped in the online LIHKG forum favored by protesters, the song is reminiscent of national anthems the world over.
Within a week or two of the song first making its appearance online—just a month before China celebrates its national day—it was being sung at rallies, soccer matches, and at pop-up protests in shopping malls.

Lai, the ethnomusicologist, explains, "‘Glory to Hong Kong’ is a piece of march music which fits the protesters’ methods and determination.
Protesters think that the song creates a kind of solidarity and heightens their spirit."

The sentiment was echoed by protesters I spoke to on the streets as they sang the song during a recent protest.

"This song for me is very meaningful.
When I listen to this song, I think ‘This is Hong Kong,'" said Rachel, 27, a social worker who only wanted to be identified by her first name.
"When the police beat our students, I feel very helpless.
But when I sing this song, I feel very powerful."

"I feel very proud of it, very emotional," said Chong, 26, who works in sales.
"It makes us feel more united.
We feel the common identity of Hong Kongers."

With lines such as, "Distant clouds will echo still our call to battle; We are fighting for Freedom," and "Again, our blood will be shed!
But ‘Forward!’
our cry rings out!"
(in the English translation rendered by renowned Sinologists and translators John Minford and Geremie Barmé) the song reflects the violent struggles of recent months that have revived 2014’s calls for democracy.
But the song can also be understood as containing a glimmer of brightness in the dark.

One recent Sunday night in the shopping district of Causeway Bay, at the end of a long and particularly violent day of clashes between protesters and police, a young woman stood by the roadside playing "Glory to Hong Kong" on a harmonica.
When I asked what the song meant to her, she replied: "The song means hope for Hong Kong, and hope in people’s hearts."



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = quarantine
document number 1: 
Quarantine and Isolation: A Brief History of Public Health Measures Against Infectious Disease


"From isolation in the home to the closure of public spaces, history contains many pertinent lessons in the control of infectious disease."


By now, most of us are no strangers to the idea of quarantine.
"Self-isolation" and "social distancing" have come to be the new normal for many people all over the world as we attempt to arrest the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Staying home as much as possible, keeping away from hospitals and health centres, not travelling outside the country, working from home, and other measures which all seem new and unprecedented in our own lives are no strangers to history– as we implement different forms of quarantine today, it is useful, and perhaps imperative, to look back at their origins in the diseases we have fought in the past.

Quarantine and isolation, as we have all no doubt seen, come in many different forms.
From isolation in the home to the closure of public spaces, history contains many pertinent lessons in the control of infectious disease.
What follows is a brief history of some of these methods of quarantine and the diseases for which they were used.

The Black Death: Sanitary Cordons and Lazarettos


In the years 1347-1352, the Black Death plague was at its peak in Europe.
[1] The disease was a terrible one, killing 30-60% of the European population.
[2] It was caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis, and was transmitted to humans through fleas and rodents.
[3] During this time, there was not an awareness of germs as the cause of disease (the germ theory of disease would not be truly accepted until the latter half of the nineteenth century through the work of scientists and doctors like Louis Pasteur, Joseph Lister, Robert Koch, and others).
Mainly, disease was thought to be caused by many different possible culprits, including miasmas, or bad air, an imbalance of humours, poisoning, or divine punishment.
[4]

17th century representation of a plague doctor’s costume from the Museum of Health Care’s Collection (002050166)/ https://mhc.andornot.com/en/permalink/artifact9130

" data-image-meta="{"aperture":"0","credit":"","camera":"","caption":"","created_timestamp":"0","copyright":"","focal_length":"0","iso":"0","shutter_speed":"0","title":"","orientation":"0"}" data-image-title="Plague Doctor" data-large-file="https://museumofhealthcare.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/plague-doctor.jpg?w=280" data-medium-file="https://museumofhealthcare.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/plague-doctor.jpg?w=190" data-orig-file="https://museumofhealthcare.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/plague-doctor.jpg" data-orig-size="280,441" data-permalink="https://museumofhealthcare.wordpress.com/plague-doctor/" sizes="(max-width: 280px) 100vw, 280px" src="https://museumofhealthcare.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/plague-doctor.jpg" srcset="https://museumofhealthcare.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/plague-doctor.jpg 280w, https://museumofhealthcare.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/plague-doctor.jpg?w=95=150 95w">



####
document number 2: 
An Oral History with my sister Oumou in Guinea


, , Covid Oral History, Showcase, Spring 2020,



This person is my sister who I spent my whole childhood with.
She’s my family.
We were living together until I was 10 years old.
Then, in 2013 we separated because she got married but we were still seeing each other.
Since I moved to New York in 2016 we don’t communicate a lot like usual.


My sister Oumou is so strong and helpful.
My older sister is 26 and married at age 23.
She loves helping people.
For example every year she went into our village to take orphan children to raise as her own children.
She raised my little brother because my mom was not there.

Oumou is a very strong lady even though there’s a lockdown she’s still working at home.
She has a sewing machine to make clothes at home to keep her business going.
Also she makes face masks for communicating for free to keep her neighbor safe during the Covid 19.
The people are grateful because we don’t have good treatment in Guinea.


Did Conakry go on pause like NYC?

How is the situation of the virus Conakry?

How do you feel about the quarantined?

What do you do at home to spend your time?

How’s life changed in Guinea during quarantine?

How many people have died because of covid 19?



How do people manage the situation?

Do you have access to everything you need?

What affects you the most about the country being in lockdown?

Do you feel like your government and (leader) are doing a good job?

Is your morning routine changed?

How has this lockdown impacted your life and family?

Does your eating health change?
What was the hardest part during the quarantine?
What was the hardest thing during Ramadan in the quarantine?



Tags: Guinea oral history Park Slope Collegiate



####
document number 3: 
Factbox: Countries evacuating nationals from coronavirus-hit areas


(Reuters) - A growing number of countries around the world have been evacuating or planning to evacuate diplomatic staff and citizens from areas hit by the new coronavirus.

Following are some countries’ evacuation plans, and how they aim to manage the health risk from those who are returning.

- Hong Kong arranged four flights to bring back 533 of its residents from the Chinese province of Hubei.
The flights are set to return by March 5 and those coming back face a 14-day quarantine upon arrival.

- Over 200 Hong Kong residents on the Diamond Princess cruise in Japan had been flown back by Feb.
23 and are spending two weeks in quarantine.
Authorities said 70 of the 364 Hong Kong residents on the ship were infected and will remain in Japan along with other citizens who were in close contact with them.

- Dependants and some staff were evacuated from the British embassy in Tehran as of March 1 but essential staff will remain.

- Some 30 British passengers arrived back home on Feb.
22 from the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan.
There were more than 70 British passengers on the cruise liner when cases of Covid-19 started to emerge.

- Britain’s final evacuation flight from Wuhan, carrying more than 200 people, landed in Britain on Feb.
9.
A plane carrying 83 British and 27 European Union nationals from Wuhan landed at the end of January.

- Taiwan flew back 19 passengers from the Diamond Princess cruise ship on Feb.
21.
It evacuated 247 of the estimated 500 Taiwanese stranded in Wuhan on Feb.
3.
(bit.ly/2HOfYtg)

- A flight carrying 129 Canadians evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship landed on Feb.
21.
All repatriated passengers on the chartered flight had tested negative.
There were 256 Canadians on board the ship, of which 47 have tested positive.

- Canada, after evacuating 215 people earlier, flew back 185 citizens from Wuhan on Feb.
11.
All evacuees were quarantined for two weeks.

- More than 150 Australians arrived home on Feb.
20 to begin two weeks of quarantine after finally leaving the Diamond Princess cruise ship docked in Japan.

- A plane load of New Zealanders, Australians and Pacific Islanders evacuated from Wuhan arrived in Auckland, New Zealand on Feb.
5, officials said.

- Kuwait to send a plane to Italy to evacuate citizens.

- Qatar to bring back Qatari and Kuwaiti citizens from Iran.

- Indonesia has sent a navy ship to bring back 188 of its nationals working as crew aboard the World Dream cruise liner amid coronavirus concerns, a minister and a health ministry official said on Feb 24.

- Indonesia’s government flew 243 Indonesians from Hubei on Feb.
2 and placed them under quarantine at a military base on an island northwest of Borneo.

- In central Ukraine residents protested the arrival of a plane carrying evacuees from Hubei on Feb.
20, despite official assurances there was no danger of infection.
In addition to 45 Ukrainians, there were 27 citizens of Argentina on the plane, as well as citizens from the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Kazakhstan, Costa Rica and other countries.

- The United States flew back on Feb.
17 over 300 Americans who had been stuck on a cruise ship affected by the coronavirus.
They faced two more weeks of quarantine after spending the previous 14 days docked in Japan.

- The United States authorized the voluntary departure of its government employees and their family members from Hong Kong on Feb.
11.
On Feb.
6, two planes with about 300 passengers, mostly U.S. citizens, took off from Wuhan for the United States.

- Nepal on Feb.
16 evacuated 175 of its nationals from Wuhan.

- Six South Koreans and one Japanese spouse from the cruise shit flew to South Korea on Feb.
19 on a chartered flight.

- South Korea evacuated 147 people on a third chartered flight from Wuhan that arrived on Feb.
12.
The country flew 368 people on a charter flight that arrived on Jan.
31.

- A second evacuation flight brought back another 174 Singaporeans and their family members from Wuhan to the city state on Feb.
9.

- Thirty Filipinos returned to the Philippines on Feb.
9 from Wuhan, the Department of Foreign Affairs said.

- The 34 Brazilians evacuated from Wuhan landed in Brazil on Feb.
9.

- Uzbekistan evacuated 251 people from China, the state airline said on Feb.
6.

- Italy flew back 56 nationals from Wuhan to Rome on Feb.
3.

- Saudi Arabia evacuated 10 students from Wuhan, Saudi state television reported on Feb.
2.

- Bangladesh evacuated 312 people, mostly students, from the coronavirus epicenter of Wuhan on a special flight on Feb.
1, the foreign minister told media after they were brought back.



####
document number 4: 
Lifting the Quarantine, be Careful!






####
document number 5: 
State of Palestine: Massive coronavirus quarantine center being built in Gaza Strip






####
document number 6: 
When I Wanted To Be Quarantined


I walked through a hospital door marked "Nuclear Medicine Department" knowing that when I left, I’d be radioactive.

It took just a few minutes for the doctor to administer 100 millicuries of radioactive iodine, or I-131.
He wore a surgical mask, gloves, and a heavy lead apron.
He removed the pill, with tongs, from a cylindrical canister and dropped it into a paper cup.
Then he backed out of the room.
"As soon you’re ready," he said from the hall, "make your way out of the hospital."

I took a deep breath.
Get on with it, I thought.
This pill was the last step of my treatment for thyroid cancer.
Taking it would ensure the cancer was all gone, and that was all I wanted.

But first the pill would make me dangerous to others.
For at least 24 hours, I’d emit radiation.
For several days, my sweat, saliva, and urine would be radioactive.
For 10 days, I was supposed to avoid contact with other people.

These days, quarantine is all over the news: Several states have instituted mandatory quarantines for healthcare workers and anyone else exposed to Ebola, and Americans overwhelmingly support these measures.
Like many people, I’ve been following the story of Kaci Hickox, the Maine nurse put under mandatory quarantine after returning from Sierra Leone.
She has resisted the order, saying that she doesn’t pose a threat to public health and the quarantine violates her civil rights.

But as I prepared to swallow that pill, quarantine was exactly what I wanted.
In the summer of 2008, I spent so many hours in waiting and exam rooms wishing I was somewhere else.
That morning, though, I wanted to stay at Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Oakland, California.
I wanted to stay in a lead-lined room until it was safe for me to be around other people.

Instead, I ingested radioactive iodine, then walked out the door marked "Nuclear Medicine Department" and immediately collided with a man in the hall.

I got my diagnosis two months earlier, on May 30, 2008.
It was my 32nd birthday.

"If you

have

to get cancer, this is the one to get," said the endocrinologist who called with the news.

I had papillary thyroid cancer, which has a survival rate of 97 percent over five years—in large part because of radioactive iodine (I-131).
Unlike chemotherapy, which attacks healthy and cancerous cells alike, I-131 is targeted.
Since thyroid cells alone absorb and retain iodine, the radioactive iodine pill essentially acts like a "heat-seeking missile": It finds and destroys thyroid cells.

In July, a surgeon removed my thyroid, the butterfly-shaped gland that produces hormones that help regulate metabolism, heart rate, and body temperature, among other things.

Five weeks later, I met with a doctor to prep for my I-131 treatment.
His weary, clipped manner suggested he was tired of dealing with anxious patients.
He gave me a handout with instructions like: "Stay seven feet away from other people for 5 to 11 days."

On the verge of going radioactive, I wanted to be told exactly what to do.
There were only two things about which the doctor was absolutely clear: I was to have no contact with children and pregnant women.
And I could not get a ride home from the hospital.

If I had taken that same dose of I-131 in Europe, I probably would have been quarantined in a hospital for a few days.
But the U.S. did away with required hospital quarantines for radioactive iodine in 1997—in fact, it’s rarely an option.
Many hospitals have eliminated their radiation isolation rooms.

I went home, but before I got out of the car, I wiped down the steering wheel, gear shift, and door handle with disinfectant wipes.
Then I headed into the guest bedroom of the house I shared with my boyfriend at the time.

Time dragged in those 10 days.
Lacking the concentration to read, I watched the first season of

Lost

on DVD.
I was totally confused, but riveted, by the plot: plane crash survivors marooned on an island where nothing is what it seems.

Every time I prowled into the kitchen for food, I wore surgical latex gloves.
I always hurried back to bed to eat on paper plates with plastic utensils.

I wiped down the sink and flushed the toilet twice after every use.
At the end of the week, I tossed out the sheets and towels I’d used.
I filled a trash bag with radioactive waste, which I put in the garbage bin with some concern.
I hoped I wasn’t endangering sanitation workers or causing radioactive alarms to go off at the dump.

I emerged from the room after 10 days, and burst into tears when I got my first big hug.
I had stayed isolated for the longest time recommended by my doctor.
Still, I worried about having trace amounts of radiation inside my body for another month or so.

I had been given a paper card to carry in my wallet listing the dose and date of my treatment in case I traveled by plane and needed to explain why I was setting off the radiation alarm.
I visited friends in Seattle one month after taking the pill and held my breath as I walked through security.

I don’t think Kaci Hickox, the nurse in Maine, was being cavalier when she went out for a bike ride.
She hasn’t shown any symptoms of Ebola, which is the only time a person is contagious, and her work in Sierra Leone demonstrates her selfless concern—at the risk of her own health—for others.

Thinking about Hickox on her bike, I’m also thinking about the 60,000 people diagnosed with thyroid cancer in the U.S. last year.
Many of them, like me, will need to swallow that strange pill, and then wonder how to leave the hospital and where to go.

Becca MacLaren is history and engagement editor at Zócalo Public Square.


TIME Ideas hosts the world's leading voices, providing commentary on events in news, society, and culture.
We welcome outside contributions.
Opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the views of TIME editors.



####
document number 7: 
In photos: Living in Liberia’s Ebola quarantine towns


Photos by Frances Kennedy, WFP


In Liberia, one of the countries most affected by the Ebola outbreak, neighbourhoods like Dolo’s Town and West Point have been quarantined to contain the spread of the virus.


The quarantine has since been lifted, but for a period of 21 days, it changed daily life for thousands of Liberians.

The sealed-off roads and areas meant restricted movement for nearly 50,000 people.
Disruptions in the food trade made food increasingly expensive and harder to come by.
Children couldn’t get to school.
Parents couldn’t get to work.
And labour shortages are putting the upcoming harvest season at serious risk.

World Food Programme provided assistance to nine counties of Liberia for about 39,000 affected people, delivering life-saving supplies like food and medical equipment.

These photos reveal what life was like living in the Ebola quarantine zones in Liberia, and how WFP is helping.

Health workers at an Ebola treatment center in Monrovia


Health workers wear full personal protective equipment in an Ebola treatment center run by Medecins Sans Frontieres in Monrovia.
WFP’s logistics arm has provided support and mobile storage units to MSF as it expands this centre to cope with an ever increasing caseload of patients with the virus or those who are suspected of having it.

WFP assistance arrives in quarantined West Point neighbourhood


In urban areas, like the congested West Point slum on Monrovia’s beachfront, distributing large quantities of food is a challenge.
There is just one sealed road in and out and food distributions happen on the roadside.
Any traffic hitch can cause delays.


Taking measures to stop the spread of Ebola

WFP staff and local partners need to take increased health and hygiene precautions as they provide food assistance in Ebola-affected areas.
The Ebola virus is transmitted by body fluids, including sweat.
Gloves are crucial, and some humanitarian workers also wear masks.
Everyone is encouraged to wear long sleeved shirts to avoid skin contact.


Children in quarantined Dolo’s Town area

Schools are closed in Liberia.
And in the quarantined area of Dolo’s Town near the capital Monrovia, mothers are not taking any chances.
Janet Koiwood does not let her kids run around playing with friends as they normally do but makes them stay close to home.
WFP food rations are vital as supplies in her home and in the village dwindle due to restrictions on movement.

WFP food assistance distributed in Liberia’s restricted areas


Many Liberian families take their rations home in wheelbarrows as each of these bags of rice weighs 50 kilos.
Joseph T.
Harris, father of six, has a job at a fueling station at the airport but is in one of the restricted areas so he cannot get to work.
WFP has so far delivered food for quarantined communities in nine counties of Liberia for about 39,000 affected people.


Handwashing

Handwashing is crucial to helping prevent the spread of the Ebola virus.
Families and businesses have installed buckets with chlorinated water at the entrances to homes, shops and offices.
All people receiving WFP food must first wash their hands thoroughly.
People are encouraged to wear long-sleeved shirts when possible.


Women living in restricted Dolo’s Town area

WFP provides rations for families of five comprising yellow split peas for protein, oil for cooking and rice as a staple.
Residents are not allowed to leave to go and buy food on the markets and there are no food supplies coming in.
In other areas, prices of food are rising sharply on local market because of the disruption to trade.


Residents fear losing their jobs

Veronika Coupo waits to pick up her rice, split peas and oil from a distribution in Monrovia.
She has a job as a nanny in a wealthy suburb across town, but was unable to work because the West Point slum area where she lived was quarantined.
She worries about losing her job and how she can support her three school-aged children.



####
document number 8: 
Diamond Princess ship to remain in quarantine for a week


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


The largest outbreak outside mainland China is on a cruise ship.
The Diamond Princess off the coast of Japan has now 175 positive cases, 15 of them are Australians.



####
document number 9: 
My International Travel Experience during the COVID-19 Pandemic



We are currently in the middle of an international crisis where most (if not all) countries have implemented travel restrictions that make all but essential international travel impossible.
What is it like to travel during a pandemic?
Here's my recent travel experience.

Beppe walking through an Empty Terminal A at Boston Logan Airport


Changing Travel Plans


I live my life on two continents.
I'm a US citizen married to an Italian, and while we spend a majority of our time in the USA, our travel business that focuses on active travel in Italy makes it necessary to travel to Italy several times a year.

Normally in May we are beginning our first busy period of the year running tours in Italy.
This year, that has all changed.
We were supposed to fly from the USA to Italy in early April for our annual guide meeting and to see off our first tours.
The guide meeting, the tours and our flights were all canceled as we figured out how to adjust our private lives and our business to fit this new reality.

From March 11 until May 3, 2020, all of Italy was under a complete lockdown where people could not leave their homes except for food or emergencies.
On May 4, "Phase 2" began, with a gradual easing of restrictions to take place throughout May and June.
We decided to fly back to Italy on May 5 once Phase 2 had started and bought the tickets three weeks before our departure.

Flights to Italy were hard to come by, but we did know that Alitalia was guaranteeing one daily flight from New York (JFK) to Rome.
We booked an itinerary that included that flight and began to prepare.
I periodically checked the reservation online to make sure it hadn't been cancelled.
Flight times and numbers changed but the reservation remained intact.
Or so I thought.

The day before our scheduled flight I had a question about excess luggage, so I called Delta to ask (the flights were booked through Delta).
When I got through and said I was flying to Italy the next day, the customer service rep stopped me before I could ask my question and told me my flight had been canceled several days before.
I had never been informed.

She found a note on my file saying "flight canceled, inform passenger" that was probably put there by an Alitalia employee.
Alitalia and Delta are both part of the Sky Team and reservations with either are supposed to be seamless, but obviously something went wrong in this case.

Beppe then called up the Italian Consulate and the Embassy and asked what happened to the guaranteed flight.
As far as they knew, the flight was still on.
He called up Alitalia and the rep said the flight was canceled for the rest of May.
No reason was given, but we suspect money from the Italian government that had been subsidizing the flights ran out.

There was nothing we could do; the flight was gone with no warning.
Delta's customer service and communication are usually excellent and I am sure the issue was with Alitalia, however I did file a complaint with Delta since I booked the original flight through them.

After the shock wore off I called up Delta again to find a new flight.
That week a new route had started up again from Detroit to Amsterdam, and from there we could get to Italy.
They honored the original ticket price (which was very low) and the only stipulation was that the destination could not change.
While a flight to Turin or Milan would have been more convenient, we stuck with a flight to Rome.
We had a rental car waiting for us in Rome as well.

Our new route departed on May 6: flights from Boston to Detroit to Amsterdam to Rome, and then the rental car to drive from Rome to Turin.
Due to restrictions in place for people arriving from outside of Italy we were not allowed to take public transportation or get picked up by anyone we do not live with.
Before leaving the USA we had to alert the local health authorities in Turin of our arrival.
Upon arrival at home we would have to go into a mandatory 14-day quarantine during which we have to take our temperatures twice a day and report if over 37.5 C, or if we had any other COVID-19 symptoms.

Temperature Log


The Start of a 30-Hour Journey


We weren't traveling light: we had six pieces of luggage between us, including two bike cases.
My sister drove us in to Logan Airport in her pickup truck.
We had to leave early so that her young girls could be back home before nap time.
It was the quickest drive from the South Shore of MA to the airport that I remember in my lifetime.
We arrived at the airport with plenty of time to spare.
Of course, it wasn't necessary.
When we entered Terminal A we were the only two passengers there pre-security.
The first thing that hit me was how dark it was.
Most of the lights were off.
And then, the emptiness.
I scanned the long counter area to find a human to help us.
Down at the far right, there were two counters open.

Bikes and Luggage Loaded for the Trip


When we approached the counter, we were immediately helped by four people who checked us in quickly and took away our oversized bags.
There were other employees walking around, wiping down surfaces with disinfectant wipes.
Everyone (including us) was wearing a mask.
I asked one of the agents how many Delta flights were going out that day and she said, "nine."

Six of Delta's Nine Flights


After checking in we walked towards security and while we were still quite a distance away I made eye contact with the one TSA agent who was checking passports at the security checkpoint.
We walked up to her and she checked our documents.
We did have to take down our masks for a moment so she could verify who we were.
Going through security was quick and uneventful.
We both have TSA precheck and were given pieces of paper to hand over once we reached the belt so we didn't have to take out our laptops or remove our shoes.

Entering Terminal A was surreal.
I did not see one other passenger in any direction.
Besides TSA agents and a few other workers, there were no other people.
All shops were closed, as well as most restaurants.
We walked the length of the first part of the terminal to take it all in.

Video from an Empty Terminal A Just Past Security


We had access to the Delta lounge on this day, so we went up.
Again, we were the only passengers there.
There was one employee at the desk and another walking around.
We checked in and entered.
The bar was closed, per Massachusetts regulations.
There was no hot food or buffet.
There were prepackaged snacks, soda and bottled water available.
The coffee machine was working.
Bottles of hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes were available throughout.

We had the Sky Club to ourselves.


We started up a conversation with the employee who was walking around.
He said that although it was strange for the lounge to be so empty, after one month like this most employees were used to it.
He said on a typical day the two Delta lounges at Boston Logan Airport would see a combined 1800 passengers.
The average number each day in April was 18.
During our two+ hours in the lounge only two other passengers came in.

Empty Lounge


30 minutes before our flight we went down to our gate.
Everyone was wearing a mask.
Boarding was different from usual as the gate agents called people up by rows, starting from the back of the plane.
The only exception were those seated in first class and those with the highest frequent flier status who could still board at any time.

A View of Terminal A from the Sky Club


The flight was not full, but there were more people than I expected.
I estimate the flight was at about 30% capacity.
Delta is social distancing on their flights and passengers were spaced out.
The plane was clean, much cleaner than I'm used to.
Flight attendants, all wearing masks, came through and handed us all disinfectant wipes.
Even though my area seemed clean, I used my wipe to disinfect my touch screen, tray table and seatbelt buckle.

Sanitizing Wipes Given to Each Passenger


Flight attendants minimized the amount of trips they had to take down the aisle.
After the flight took off they came through once more with packages that included a bottle of water, a package of crackers, a package of cookies, and a small packet of hand sanitizer.
The packages were the same in all classes.
In the first class cabin, the usual complimentary drink service was not available.

Delta's Snack Pack


I did not use the restroom in this flight, so I don't know what it was like.
I imagine it had been cleaned using the new hygiene standards that Delta has in place.

Arrival in Detroit and Preparation for Travel to Europe


We had a few hours in the Detroit airport and decided to stay by the gate.
It was busier than Boston, with more shops open and more people, but still felt empty.
Most people were wearing masks.
Nobody seemed to be in a rush, which seemed off for an airport.
The was a cautious, serious feeling in the air, but everyone remained calm.

The restroom I used in the terminal was spotless.
During the wait for our next flight we made some calls and checked emails.
About an hour before takeoff, every passenger was given a health declaration form that we were supposed to hand in once we arrived in Amsterdam.

Health Declaration Form to Enter Amsterdam


After the forms were handed out, certain passengers were called up to the desk one by one and I was one of them.
Every passenger who did not have a European passport had to prove they could enter Europe.
I showed my residency paperwork and was approved to travel.

When boarding started the first class cabin entered first, then everyone else by row starting from the back of the plane.
As we were called up we had to stand six feet apart as each person entered.
This was a contactless boarding that utilized facial recognition software.
As we approached the gate we had to take down our mask in order to be scanned in.
We also had to show that we completed our health declaration form.

Beppe Getting Ready to Board


The flight was not full at all.
We estimate the were 60-75 passengers.
This was another Delta-operated flight and so they were practicing social distancing on board and everyone was spaced out.
Beppe and I were seated in a three-seat middle section that we had to ourselves.
The rows in front of us and behind us were also empty and by mid-flight we had each taken our own row.
The flight was just as clean as the first flight we took.

Aside from everyone wearing masks and the plane being almost empty, the flight seemed normal.
We had a regular food service and everyone on board was calm.
Beppe and I slept for a good portion of the flight.


Ben Jerry's for Dessert on the Flight to AMS

Arriving in Amsterdam was overwhelming.
Our connection time was under an hour, which I didn't think would be a problem given the small number of people traveling, however there were many new protocols in place.
Everyone traveling to Italy was directed to the same gate in the terminal where we had to stand in a long line.
We never had to hand over our health declaration forms for Amsterdam and instead were given two copies of health declaration forms for Italy.
One of those had to be given to gate agents before we boarded and the other was for arrival in Italy.


Beppe Filling out a Health Declaration form at AMS

There were at least two flights to Italy leaving within 15 minutes of each other and due to all of the additional screenings and paperwork both left late.
It was clear that a streamlined system for all of the regulations was not yet in place.
There were large lines of people and lots of confusion.

Waiting in Line in AMS for a Temperature Check


We waited in line to fill out the health declaration.
We waited in another line for a temperature check.
Then, more paperwork: a declaration that we had a residence in Italy and that we would need to travel through different regions to get to it (movement between the regions was prohibited at the time, except in cases of necessity).
All of our paperwork was checked and my residence documents were checked as well.

Self-Declaration to Enter Italy


Into Italy and the Start of Quarantine


Our flight took off about 15 minutes late.
It was less than half full.
This flight was operated by KLM.
They were following social distancing protocols on the flight; even Beppe and I were seated in our own separate rows.
There was no drink service and the flight attendants asked that we not stand in the aisle to wait for the bathroom and instead wait at our seat.
The plane was not dirty, but it was noticeably less sanitized than the Delta-operated flights.

Arriving in Rome's Fiumicino was another surreal experience: dark, nearly empty and much less activity than in Detroit.
We deplaned and before we could get to our luggage we had one more checkpoint to pass where all of our documents were checked and we were asked why we were in Italy and where we lived.

We found an open bar on the way to our luggage and stopped for a coffee.
There was one person working and no other customers.
Beppe approached the bar and ordered.
We were served coffee in to-cups and did not linger long.

Beppe Waiting for the Car Rental


After we picked up our luggage we went to the rental car area to get our vehicle.
We had a seven+ hour drive ahead of us.
I thought that we would be stopped several times en route to our house, at least crossing from region to region, but we weren't stopped at all.
Traffic was not bad along the way and there were mostly trucks on the road.
About half of the rest stops and restaurants were open.

We arrived at home the night of the 7th to start our mandatory 14-day quarantine.
Our kitchen was well-stocked, thanks to Beppe's mom who lives close by.
As I write this, we are finishing up our last days in quarantine.
While we have not been able to leave, we have been well-fed and cared for!

Home-Cooked Meals and Other Food Waiting for Us


Once our quarantine ends we will be able to leave the house and travel around our region.
Masks are mandatory when we will be around other people.
Businesses are beginning to open.
Travel between regions begins on June 3.
On that date visitors from other European countries can enter the country without going into quarantine.
There is no word yet on when people from outside of Europe will be able to return.


Have you traveled recently?
Will you travel in the near future?
Tell us about your experience or your thoughts.



####
document number 10: 
As COVID-19 Rips Through A Missouri Family, A Mom Tries To Hold Things Together



Misty Donaldson-Urriola and Edgar Urriola of Raytown, Mo., are recently divorced.
But they have remained close friends as they raise their three sons together.

They generally see each other every day.

That constant contact and proximity – an aspect of family life – is being put to the test by a disease that thrives when people are close together.

Misty says that just before St.
Patrick's Day, Edgar told her he had started feeling run down.
He had a fever but no cough.
They thought he had the flu.

Four days after that first fever, Edgar started experiencing shortness of breath.
He went to an urgent care center the next morning.

From there, things spiraled quickly.
Edgar had developed pneumonia.
His oxygen levels were dangerously low.
An ambulance raced him to a local hospital.

"Within two hours, they're like, 'We're going to intubate you.'
It was that fast," Misty says.


Edgar "said he loves the kids," Misty recalls.
"He got to talk to the three boys, and then they sedated him."

That was the last time they spoke to Edgar.
Doctors put him on a ventilator.
And Misty was told she and her three boys needed to quarantine themselves.

But the coronavirus hadn't finished ripping through her family.
The day after his father went into the hospital, 7-year-old Matthew spiked a fever overnight.

The next morning, Misty heard a big bang.
"I walked into the bathroom," she recounts.
"He's laying on the floor, kind of twitching."

Matthew had passed out.
Misty says he was talking "gibberish" and she was worried he'd hit his head and had a concussion.

She called an ambulance, and when the paramedics arrived, she warned them that the family was under quarantine.
At the hospital, doctors checked Matthew and gave him fluids for dehydration, then sent him home.
They told Misty to bring him back if his symptoms worsened.

"He had a fever that day, a little bit the next day," she says.
"We had a lot of sleep."
Matthew hasn't had fever since then.
"So thank goodness," his mom says.

Matthew's older brothers, Justin, 13, and Lucas, 14, have also shown signs of illness, such as headaches and fatigue.
But with confirmatory tests still in short supply, there's no way to know for sure if they, too, were infected with the coronavirus.

Misty says she, too, has felt unwell.

"I don't know if it's stress, I don't know if it's symptoms," she says.
"It's so scary.
It's hard to say."

Doctors say it's not uncommon for the coronavirus to spread quickly through a family.
Dr. Vineet Chopra, a hospitalist and associate professor at the University of Michigan, says sometimes the virus can spread before anyone knows they are sick.

"If you don't know you have it, there's not really much you can do to protect yourselves," he says.

But if someone in a household shows signs of illness, he says, it's important to designate a room or space, as best you're able to, where they can be isolated from everyone else — and, if it is possible, a "designated bathroom where people don't share stuff with you."

Dr.
Alex Isakov of Emory University adds that if you do need to share a bathroom, the person who is sick should disinfect it after every use if they can.
If this is not possible, you, as the caregiver, should try to not enter the bathroom immediately.
And when you do, wipe down frequently touched surfaces with a disinfectant before the next use, and wash your hands well afterward.

In fact, anyone living with someone who has symptoms of COVID-19 should be particularly careful to scrupulously wash their hands often and not touch their face — the same general rules we're all advised to follow now.
Chopra suggests wearing gloves and a mask or face covering whenever interacting with someone who has symptoms, and keeping at least six feet away.

"We're humans, we're social creatures," Chopra says.
"We want to interact with our loved ones.
But, you know, in a time when somebody has an infection, we really have to resist that urge and keep our distance from people."

It's been more than two weeks since Misty and the boys began their quarantine.
Edgar is still on a ventilator.
Misty says she's got no choice but to stay strong — for her children, and for Edgar.

"There was a time where I kind of wavered, like, 'Oh, this is it.'
Thinking the worst," Misty says.
"And that made stress — and everything — worse.
I said, 'I can't think like that.'
It's hard, but we're trying to stay positive."

She's also trying to keep family life as normal as possible for the kids.
That means a regular routine for meals, school work and family game nights — and finding reasons to celebrate.
Last week, Misty and Edgar's youngest son, Matthew, turned 8.
Friends and family stopped by to wish him well ... from a safe distance in the yard.

Meanwhile, the family is keeping hope alive that Edgar will be able to come home.

"We're just trying to hang in there and hope he's still fighting," Misty says.



####
document number 11: 
Merkel went shopping for loo roll and soap in busy supermarket hours before she was forced into coronavirus quarantine




GERMAN Chancellor Angela Merkel was spotting shopping for loo roll and soap in a busy supermarket hours before she was forced into quarantine.

Ms Merkel, 65, was told on Sunday after a press conference that the doctor who gave her a vaccine had tested positive for coronavirus.

⚠️ Read our coronavirus live blog for the latest news updates



German Chancellor Angela Merkel was spotting shopping for loo roll and wine over the weekend Credit: Splash News



Ms Merkel spent about half an hour getting good before checking out from the supermarket in Berlin Credit: Splash News


She was seen shopping over the weekend pushing a cart with loo roll, wine, soap and other goods in Berlin for about half an hour.

The Chancellor did not wear a face mask, and she went shopping before being notified about the doctor's diagnosis.

She was informed about the doctor's test shortly after holding a news conference on Sunday about new measures to curb the spread of the virus, her spokesman Steffen Seibert said.

The Chancellor had received a precautionary vaccine against pneumococcal infection on Friday, Mr Seibert said.

In a statement, he also said that Merkel would undergo "regular tests" in the coming days and continue with her work from home for the time being.

The Chancellor is optimistic that will she not come down with virus because only had brief contact with the doctor.



Helge Braun, her chief of staff, said on a talk show on ARD television late on Sunday: "Given that, we are optimistic that the chancellor is perhaps not infected at all."

Merkel had earlier expressed her gratitude to Germans who were following the rules on social distancing, saying it was important to remain at least 1.5-metres (about five feet) apart to reduce the likelihood of infection.

She said: "Thank you.
I know it means making sacrifices, both personal and economic.

"I am very moved that so many people are obeying the rules.
That's how we show that we care for older people and the sick, for whom the virus is the most dangerous.
In short, that's how we save lives.

"The great aim is to gain time in the fight against the virus."

She also announced a nationwide ban on public meetings of more than two people outside work, saying the ban would be in place for at least two weeks.

Merkel told reporters: "The development illustrated how even world leaders aren't free from the risk of infection.

"With a certain distance the risk of infections is reduced almost to zero.

"Whether you are half a meter apart or 1.5 meters apart makes a huge difference."


Merkel was also seen with soap in her shopping cart over the weekend Credit: Splash News





Ms Merkel, 65, was informed about the doctor's test shortly after holding a news conference Sunday Credit: EPA



Best coronavirus memes - People are finding entertainment wherever they can during self-isolation



####
document number 12: 
Ebola virus and U.S. preparedness: Research on quarantines, treatments, transmission



The first U.S. case of Ebola was reported on September 25, 2014, when a man who had earlier traveled to Liberia sought help in a Dallas hospital.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formally confirmed the diagnosis three days later.
That patient, Thomas Eric Duncan, eventually died, and two health workers who had contact with him contracted the virus.
While Ebola is contagious only when those affected are experiencing active symptoms, Duncan was sent home after an initial visit to the hospital.
Further, a New York City doctor who recently returned from West Africa has also been infected.

The current outbreak of Ebola in West Africa is the deadliest in the history of the disease, with thousands of infections and deaths in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The two latter countries could see 1.4 million cases by January 2015, according to CDC estimates.
The disease was first identified in 1976, appearing simultaneously in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Until now the number of cases has been fairly limited, but the fatality rates are high — anywhere from 25% to 90%; the average is 50% — depending on the strain of virus and the care received.

The World Health Organization has concluded that both Nigeria and Senegal appear to have stopped the spread of the disease, ending its transmission in those countries.
Many top U.S. health experts say that, despite widespread fear, there remains a very low chance of an epidemic in America.
Based on National Safety Council data, the

Washington Post

calculated that the lifetime odds of dying of Ebola in the United States are 1 in 3,934,300 — compared to 1 in 491 for a car crash, 1 in 79 for the flu and 1 in 7 for heart disease.

Quarantines and legal authority

Following policy decisions by New Jersey and New York, there remain deep questions about the efficacy of quarantines in the United States, and related legal and ethical considerations.
The Congressional Research Service has published a brief on legal issues relating to screening and detaining incoming international travelers at airports, and domestic issues of quarantines.
An October 2014 paper from Mark A. Rothstein at the University of Louisville, "From SARS to Ebola: Legal and Ethical Considerations for Modern Quarantine," provides a survey of legal and ethical questions that remain unresolved:

The federal government has the constitutional authority under the Commerce Clause to impose quarantine to prevent the international and interstate spread of infection, and this responsibility has been delegated to the CDC.
Nevertheless, the states maintain primary responsibility for public health, including quarantine.
Many of the state quarantine laws date to the early twentieth century.
The anthrax attack in 2001 provided the impetus for updating these laws to modernize and streamline state public health emergency response.
Although all of the states have updated their laws, at least to some extent, these efforts must be considered works in progress.
Some of the model laws used as templates for modernization have been criticized for failing to include adequate protections for civil liberties and due process.
Virtually all of the laws lack key ancillary measures needed for successful quarantine, such as prohibiting employment discrimination against individuals in quarantine and providing for temporary income replacement so that individuals will not be tempted to violate the quarantine and go to work.

Past surveys of state legal policies also show variations in the scope of available powers.
For more, see the following academic papers from legal scholars: "Pandemic Influenza: Ethics, Law, and the Public’s Health"; and "Public Health Versus Personal Liberty: The Uneasy Case for Individual Detention, Isolation and Quarantine."

Treatments, therapies and new drugs

As a 2014 article in the

Journal of the American Medical Association

(JAMA) points out, Ebola has been around for many years now, but little progress has been made in terms of treatment: "Since 1976 more than 15 Ebola outbreaks have erupted in sub Saharan Africa, yet therapeutic options remain undeveloped.
There are no licensed vaccines or specific antiviral or immune-mediated treatments for ill patients or for post-exposure prophylaxis."
An experimental drug, ZMapp, is under development, but large-scale medical trials and anything resembling wide-scale availability are far in the future — if it’s effective, which is an open question at this point.
Logistical problems and a lack of funding have hampered efforts to deploy experimental drugs and vaccines, as the journal

Nature

notes.

The Broad Institute, jointly run by Harvard and MIT, has reported some progress in getting a fuller understanding of the genomics of the disease and its mutations, as reported in the journal

Science

.

While there is an urgent need to rapidly accelerate the testing of new treatments, doing so has potential downsides as well.
As the University of Pennsylvania’s Dr.
Steven Joffe writes, "efforts to evaluate novel agents risk diverting attention and human and material assets from proven therapeutic and public health measures.
Well-motivated initiatives directed at promising new therapies must not jeopardize existing health infrastructures."

In an October 2014 article published

The New England Journal of Medicine

, leading researchers note:

Even if adequate safety and immunogenicity are demonstrated in the phase 1 studies, vaccines will not be available in substantial quantity until the first quarter of 2015 at the earliest.
For that to occur, funding must be secured for production.
Even if an effective vaccine can be produced, it is not likely to be 100% effective, so to succeed in stemming the current outbreak, a coordinated effort to improve capacity and provide clinical care in affected countries needs to be scaled up urgently.

An October 2014 letter published in

The Lancet

suggests that one promising research avenue is to investigate those who appear to have an immunity to Ebola, as "many Ebola infections are asymptomatic."
The article notes that "although asymptomatic infections are unlikely to be infectious, they might confer protective immunity and thus have important epidemiological consequences."

Finally, the lack of an effective drug to treat Ebola has also become a political issue.
"NIH has been working on Ebola vaccines since 2001.
It’s not like we suddenly woke up and thought, ‘Oh my gosh, we should have something ready here,'" Dr.
Francis Collins, the head of the National Institutes of Health, has said.
"Frankly, if we had not gone through our 10-year slide in research support, we probably would have had a vaccine in time for this that would’ve gone through clinical trials and would have been ready."

Potential for a large-scale outbreak

While Ebola virus is extremely dangerous, its transmission rate is lower than that of many other diseases.
"As long as people are under proper care and appropriate precautions are taken, there’s no reason to think we can’t control the transmission of the virus," Harvard’s Michael VanRooyen has said.
"So in that sense, it’s not like SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome] or MERS [Middle East respiratory syndrome], for example, where we would worry about an epidemic spreading in the United States."

In terms of the global spread of the disease, an October 2014 study published in

The Lancet

notes: "Based on epidemic conditions and international flight restrictions to and from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone as of Sept 1, 2014 (reductions in passenger seats by 51% for Liberia, 66% for Guinea, and 85% for Sierra Leone), our model projects 2·8 travellers infected with Ebola virus departing the above three countries via commercial flights, on average, every month."

Contagiousness is measured by the average number of people whom a sick person will infect.
This is strongly influenced by the specifics of each illness — when a person becomes infectious themselves after catching the disease, and how the disease can be transmitted.
The transmission rate is called the disease reproduction factor and is referred to as "R0" or "R nought."

One of the most infectious diseases is measles: In an unvaccinated population, a sick person will infect 18 others on average.
(Because the vast majority of the U.S. population is vaccinated against measles, in practice its reproduction rate is effectively zero.)
By comparison, the reproduction rate for mumps is 10, and that for SARS is 4.
HIV is also 4, while Hepatitis C’s rate is approximately 2.

A September 2014 study in

PLoS Current Outbreaks

, "Assessing the International Spreading Risk Associated with the 2014 West African Ebola Outbreak," indicates that the reproduction rate for Ebola is between 1.5 and 2.
Two factors are at play: First, sick people become infectious themselves only when they begin to show symptoms.
Second, direct contact is required for the disease to be transmitted.
Still, because there is no vaccine against Ebola, extreme caution is warranted, and missteps by the Dallas Hospital have increased the chance that others may have been infected.

The study also models the international spreading of the outbreak — the case in Dallas was the first outside Africa — and estimates the probability of Ebola virus appearing in countries around the world.
The results indicate that in the short term, the probability of international spread is "small but not negligible," and could increase if the disease continues to advance in Africa.
Countries outside Africa with the highest probability of outbreaks include the United Kingdom, Belgium and France, in part because of significant air-traffic flows.

Science and the airborne transmission hypothesis

One of the most controversial issues implicated in the current outbreak is the issue of whether Ebola can be transmitted through the air.
Scientists do not believe it can, based on the most recent lab experiments.
The CDC summarizes the findings of several studies as follows: "Airborne transmission of Ebola virus has been hypothesized but not demonstrated in humans.
While Ebola virus can be spread through airborne particles under experimental conditions in animals, this type of spread has not been documented during human EVD outbreaks in settings such as hospitals or households."

In terms of citations for this claim, a 2014

Nature

study performed a careful test involving primates in a lab setting and did not find evidence of airborne transmission.
That is the best and most recent evidence.
The CDC does note two 1995 studies and a 2011 study that drew different, though not necessarily contradictory, conclusions.
An October 2014 letter in

The Lancet

presents what is known about the need for respiratory protection.

U.S. preparedness and concerns

The United States has been planning and practicing for pandemics since the 1970s, and experts note that the "pillars" of this public health work remain basically the same: surveillance; vaccination and medical countermeasures; emergency response coordination; and communications.

For U.S. facilities to prepare for Ebola, there will need to be a variety of unique systems and protocols put into place, health experts note.
A 2014 article in the

Annals of Internal Medicine

spells out four crucial steps: "First, staff education is vital to ‘demystifying’ Ebola and reducing anxiety; second, posters clarifying PPE [personal protective equipment] donning and doffing procedures facilitate staff understanding and compliance; and third, an ongoing, coordinated multidisciplinary effort is required to establish standard operating procedures and staff must be trained to follow them; and finally, direct observation of clinical care enforces adherence to these procedures."
However, all new systems, equipment and public health protocols carry with them the possibility of introducing new risks.
Top experts on health procedures and systems say that an Ebola epidemic is preventable in the United States if strict protocols are followed.

In recent years, the CDC has warned about gaps in epidemiology capacity in state health departments; other academic survey-based research has also furnished warnings about decreased capacity.
Recent crises have seen relatively successful outcomes, but they have been by no means without cost, as noted in a 2013 study in the journal

Emerging Infectious Diseases

:

Although the 2009 A(H1N1)pdm09 pandemic spread globally within a matter of weeks, a 1918-like pandemic did not materialize.
Nonetheless, this most recent pandemic resulted in [approximately] 12,500 deaths in the United States, [approximately] 90% of which occurred in persons [younger than] 65 years of age.
In the wake of this pandemic, the challenge in preparedness is to sustain the interest of private and public sectors in planning for a large-scale outbreak that may have a much more severe effect at a time that cannot be predicted.

A 2014 paper in the

New England Journal of Medicine

, "Pandemic Preparedness and Response: Lessons from the H1N1 Influenza of 2009," offers deep analysis on what research and experience have revealed, and how that might influence future disease outbreaks.
The author, Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg of the Institute of Medicine, notes recent "operational missteps" by the World Health Organization, and "in light of these structural impediments and operational deficiencies, the world was very fortunate that the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic was not more severe."

Further resources: Also see the Congressional Research Service report "Ebola: Basics about the Disease."
Other vital sources of research-based information on the virus are

The Lancet

’s Ebola Research Centre, the Ebola Communication Network (USAID and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health) and the World Health Organization.

Keywords: infectious diseases, pandemics, disease outbreaks, Ebola, influenza, quarantines



####
document number 13: 
Photo essay: COVID-19, quarantine, and glimpses of community


by Melanie Jongsma


LANSING, Ill.
(April 6, 2020) – The following photos were gathered between March 17 and April 4, 2020, and show glimpses of Lansing’s response to COVID-19.

The Harris family took advantage of a late March snowfall to make an appropriately protected snowman.
"Maybe it will bring smiles to readers’ faces during this COVID-19 shutdown," wrote Renuka Harris.
(Photo provided)


Banks like First National Bank (3256 Ridge Road) are still serving clients, but with no direct contact.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


87-year-old Rosalie Putignano and her 90-year-old neighbor Viola are using "old-fashioned texting" to keep in contact with each other.
(Photo: Retta Putignano, Rosalie’s daughter)


The two have been neighbors for a long time and understand the importance of community.
(Photo: Retta Putignano)


Following Governor Pritzker’s directive, the Illinois Gaming Board suspended all video gaming operations until at least April 30, due to COVID-19.
On March 17 officials arrived at Lynnie Ques Airport Bar Grill (3249 Glenwood-Lansing Road) to shut down and sanitize the machines.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


The words of Jesus in Matthew 18:20 have taken on new relevance as Lansing churches are prevented from assembling.
"For where two or three gather in my name," reads the First Church PCA sign, "there am I with them."
First Church PCA is located at 3134 Ridge Road.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


Living Word Church (2248 186th Street) tries an online Spirit Week to keep members engaged and connected.


A worker at the Lansing Walmart (17625 Torrence Avenue) carefully sanitizes each grocery cart as it is returned.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


"Every day for the past few weeks, this sweet but shy orange and white cat has been showing up on our front porch to wait patiently for both breakfast and dinner," wrote Pat Kremer.
"And, now that I’m at home sheltering in place, I’m happy to oblige."
(Photo: Becky Hluska)


Avery Hall, owner of Ooowee Chicken Ribs (18155 Roy Street, 708-418-6671), says his faith and hard work have kept him in business.
He appreciates the support he’s received from the community.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


COVID-19 forced the Lansing Area Chamber of Commerce to close its office (18155 Roy Street, #3), but work continues remotely.
Director Amy Todd sends regular emails to members, encouraging them through the crisis and offering links to resources.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


In addition, Chamber Director Amy Todd and Chamber Board member Karen Kleine (of Minuteman Press, 17930 Torrence Avenue) are working on fun ways to remind the community to "Support Local."
(Photo: Karen Kleine)


Large signs in the windows of the Lansing Municipal Center (3141 Ridge Road) encourage passersby to "Stay Healthy, Safe, and Strong, Lansing."
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


Lansing’s Three Roosters grocery store (3224 171st Street) has plenty of fresh produce, meat, and canned goods for shoppers who prefer not to face crowds at the larger chain stores.
(Photo: Daisy Herrera)


On an otherwise dreary March morning, raindrops form miniature ornaments on a tree along a municipal parking lot.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


Lansing residents Christina Buiter and her daughter Tessa put three sticks together with a cup holder to send smoothies and homemade goodies up to their parents, Carl and Annette Boender, who live on the second floor of Hartsfield Village in Munster, Indiana.
As a senior living community, Hartsfield began observing visitor restrictions in mid-March, so some families found creative ways to stay in touch.
(Photo provided)


A house along Burnham Avenue makes sure the postman receives a cheery Easter greeting each day.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


A discarded mask awaits the arrival of someone willing to properly dispose of it.
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


"Welcome to St.
Quarantine Lutheran Church," joked Rev.
John Holyer to viewers of his Wednesday night video of Trinity Lutheran Church’s midweek service.
Trinity’s online services are at trinitylutheranlansing.com.


A faded chalk message along the Pennsy Greenway bike trail encourages people to "Have a good day!!"
(Photo: Melanie Jongsma)


2 thoughts on "Photo essay: COVID-19, quarantine, and glimpses of community"



Loved this photo essay, Melanie!
It’s hard to explain but it made me feel less alone.
It definitely lifted my spirits.



Comments are closed.



####
document number 14: 
95,000 stranded at sea: What happens when a cruise ship becomes a hot zone


The last place anyone wants to be during the coronavirus pandemic is stranded aboard a cruise ship, where disease can spread with lightning speed.

This week, the last 3,500 or so passengers aboard three cruise ships stuck at sea will be coming into port at last.
The

Pacific Princess

and the

MSC Magnifica,

are scheduled to berth today in California and France with 1,880 passengers, who will be transferred into home isolation.
The

Costa Deliziosa

had to evacuate one passenger with health issues last week at the port in Marsala, Italy.
The ship’s nearly 2,000 passengers were reportedly quarantined until a coronavirus test came back negative, and the ship is said to be disembarking most of them in Barcelona today before returning to Genoa, Italy with its remaining 453 Italian citizens.
There are still 124 additional ships in U.S. waters with 95,000 crew members of varying nationalities on board with no clear timeline for when and how they will all return to their home countries, some of which have closed their borders.

(

Related: How hard will the coronavirus hit the travel industry?

)

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.



Left:

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.

Right:

Members of the U.S. Coast Guard load personal protective equipment into a

… Read More

Photograph by Gabrielle Lurie, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Petty Officer 3rd Class Taylor Bacon, U.S. Coast Guard District 11, AP (Right)

Since the March 14 no-sail order issued by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the agency has helped bring more than 12,000 citizens and foreign nationals into home isolation.
At least 17 cruises have had passengers testing positive for COVID-19.
"We’ve even had people coming back positive from Nile River cruises," says Cindy Friedman, a medical epidemiologist who leads the CDC’s cruise ship team.

Even when quarantined inside their cabin, passengers are not necessarily shielded from infection, says Joacim Rocklöv , an epidemiologist at Umeå University in Sweden.
Rocklöv estimates that a single person on board the

Diamond Princess

cruise ship in January infected 15 others, a rate four times higher than observed in Wuhan, China, where the new coronavirus virus first emerged.
Rocklöv suggests this could’ve been partly due to a "super spreader" event, such as a social engagement on-board where the first infected passenger or passengers mingled with uninfected ones.

Passengers began to disembark from the Grand Princess cruise ship at the Port of Oakland in Oakland, California on March 10.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


(

Related: Here’s how to fight germs wherever you go.

)

The virus is primarily transmitted through small respiratory droplets, which can spread on surfaces, through close contact, and, possibly, the ship’s ventilation system.
Crew members packed up to eight to a room and delivering food to passengers can also expedite its spread.
The disease has been particularly insidious because as many as a quarter of people who get it may not show symptoms, and infected individuals can spread the virus to others before they show symptoms.
Because cruise ship passengers tend to be older than the overall U.S. population, they are also most susceptible to becoming critically ill or dying.

Michael Callahan , a medical doctor and infectious disease expert at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, participated in medical evacuations of the

Diamond Princess

and

Grand Princess

cruise ships.
He says that if it were up to him, cruises around the world should have been immediately evacuated and passengers and crews quarantined inside hotels for 14 days.
"You’ve got to break the chain of infection," he says.

Diamond Princess

evacuation


The true scale of the threat of COVID-19 first became clear with the outbreak aboard the

Diamond Princess

.
The infection is thought to have been brought on board by an 80-year old Chinese man who had disembarked by the time his positive test came back on February 1.
Even after guests were sequestered in their cabins and the ship docked in Yokohama, Japan, the disease continued to spread among the 2,666 passengers and 1,045 crew.
The first 10 cases were confirmed on February 5.
Japanese authorities removed sick passengers one by one and treated them at a local hospital, but passengers were otherwise confined on board.



Left:

Members of the Filipino Community Center protest perceived lack of health protections for Filipino Grand Princess workers as the ship stopped in San Francisco to restock supplies before sailing back to sea.

… Read More

Photograph by Liz Hafalia, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Tim Rue, Bloomberg, Getty Images (Right)

Deluged with emails and phone calls from passengers and family members, the CDC waited a week to authorize a quarantine operation, at which point more than 200 passengers had tested positive along with 20 crew members, including many in food service.
Inconsistent testing and delays in receiving the results, however, meant that many more were likely infected.

The U.S. had never conducted a large-scale mission to evacuate citizens from abroad amid an infectious disease outbreak.
Doing it on a cruise ship?
That was new, too.
"There was no rulebook," says Callahan.

A little-known agency inside the Department of Health and Human Services known as the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response kicked into action.
Officials there cobbled together teams of doctors, nurse practitioners, nurses and pharmacists, and brought in Callahan and another infectious disease expert, both veterans of Ebola hot zones in African nations.

(

Related: Learn how the coronavirus compares to Ebola, flu, and other outbreaks.)


James Lawler , a medical doctor and co-executive director of the Global Center for Health Security at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, got the call on a Tuesday and was on a plane to Japan the next day, having plunked down a $35,000 government grant to buy 21 pressurized bio-containment suits.
"That’s a lot of extra carry-on bags," he says.

Because of the virus’s high fatality rate—as high as one to two percent—the team treated the entire cruise ship as a "hot zone," meaning they had to use the strictest infection control procedures.
A tent set up at the farthest end of the dock was used to remove and decontaminate or dispose of their gear upon stepping off the vessel.

Doctors scrutinized

Diamond Princess’

s manifest to identify American citizens and checked on each one, beginning with passengers most at-risk, including the elderly and those with conditions such as diabetes or mobility issues.
A pharmacist based in the ship’s library maintained radio contact, obtaining appropriate prescription refills from Japanese pharmacies.

Once cleared, 329 Americans wearing masks were then taken by bus to two cargo planes and flown to quarantine on military bases in the United States.
Eleven passengers would end up testing positive by the time they arrived and were flown on to Nebraska.
Three more would fall ill later.
An additional 111 Americans were either hospitalized in Japan or remained there for other reasons.

Overall, the

Diamond Princess

outbreak infected 712 passengers and killed 9.
Had the passengers been isolated and quarantined on February 3, those actions likely would have prevented at least 76 infections, according to an analysis in the

Journal of Travel Medicine

.

A passenger cheers as medical personnel begin to move travelers from the Grand Princess cruise ship onto airplanes at Oakland International Airport.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


"It was absolutely the right move to get Americans off," Lawler says.

The March 8 cruise ship evacuation of the

Grand Princess

, which began 50 miles off the coast of California, proved to be even more harrowing for rescue workers.
Amid rough waters, the medical team had to leap from a small Coast Guard vessel to a lifeboat and on to a ladder dangling from the cruise ship—all while wearing clumsy bio-containment suits.

"A mistake would have resulted in severe injury, or death from drowning or crushing injury between the two vessels," reads a government commendation letter given to Bryan Lovejoy, a nurse practitioner on that mission.

All aboard


In the six weeks since the

Grand Princess

medical evacuation, cruise ship quarantine procedures have changed as COVID-19 has become endemic in U.S. communities and as various states and localities have enacted social distancing measures.

Under CDC oversight, cruise lines are responsible for getting passengers safely into home quarantine through charter flights and buses.
Symptomatic and asymptomatic passengers are separated, while the Coast Guard and ambulances handle those needing medical evacuation.
With a vaccine not expected until next year, it remains unclear when cruises will be safe.
On April 15, the CDC’s no-sail order was extended for 100 days or until the agency rescinds it.
"With this pandemic, it’s really not advised to go on a cruise," says the CDC’s Friedman.

Princess Cruises, Holland America, and Carnival Cruises have canceled all their bookings through the middle of the summer, though reservations are reportedly up for 2021.
In a statement, Cruise Lines International Association said that "cruising is neither the source or cause of the virus or its spread" and that "it would be a false assumption to connect higher frequency and visibility in reporting to a higher frequency of infection."

(

Related: What to do if your vacation has been canceled.

)

Carolyn Wright, a Santa Fe, New Mexico-based photographer who was quarantined on the

Grand Princess

in Oakland in March, says that she and a friend have a reservation for a cruise in Germany this fall.

"I’m certainly not looking forward to the Viking Cruise like I was," she says.
"I don’t know if it’s going to happen."

Brendan Borrell lives in Los Angeles and writes about wild places and wild people.
Follow him on Twitter.



####
document number 15: 
What the Quarantine Has Taught Me


(Sumanley xulx/Pixabay/CC0)


Let us take a break from the chaos and contemplate the beautiful lessons this virus can teach us.

It has been two weeks since I have been quarantined.
Well, since I

and my four sisters, three brothers, fiancé and dad

have been quarantined.
All 10 of us, self-quarantined under one roof in order to avoid infection.
My mother is immune-compromised so she shipped off to my grandparents a week ago in middle of nowhere, North Carolina, hoping to avoid more people and stay healthier there.
If you are following along, that means eight kids, plus one fiancé, under one roof with only dad home, who is preoccupied working from home in the dining room most of the day.

Four of the kids are now doing school work online, which I am sure will assuage once they get the hang of all these online programs, but who are still in the growing pain stages of running around screaming, "I can’t hear my teacher on this computer!

Somebody

get me the other laptop and quick!
I can’t hear what she’s saying but I can see that other students are taking notes.

Ugh

."

We all wash our hands frequently, take vitamins daily, and have essential oil diffusers going in various rooms.
My poor brother, sent home from his final semester at college, cannot go see his girlfriend lest he bring germs home to the rest of us.
My fiancé luckily made the cut to be cooped up here with us and most certainly is having internal thoughts along the lines of, "So, this is what they are

actually

like behind (literal) closed doors?"
Frames have been broken in the basement from indoor sports and we all frequently find ourselves in the kitchen snacking.
Hungry or just bored?
Most likely the latter.
You get the picture.
It has been quite the "Cheaper by the Dozen" scene over here lately.
But amongst these unprecedented times, I have been reflecting on all the

good

that this COVID-19 has given me and my family.
Let us take a break from the chaos and contemplate the beautiful lessons this virus can teach us.

Mind

The first lesson I have been reminded of is the importance to flex the muscles of the mind every single day.
My younger siblings have been doing this through their online classes and assignments of course, but what about the adults?
I suggest reading.
And I do not mean only reading articles about the latest findings on COVID-19.
I mean reading good old fashioned books — preferably physical books that you hold in your hands and flip through the pages with your fingers.

While on this quarantine, I have been able to finish two books that I have not had the time to get through.
People always say, "I wish I read more."
Well, now is a pretty darn good time to get started on that.
Read and enjoy the accomplishment you feel while flying through pages of literature that remind you of the true, good and beautiful, or perhaps even an amusing story to make you smile.
Reading challenges your mind and keeps it moving.
It teaches you life lessons and gives you new perspectives.
It enhances your vocabulary and can take you to another place, perhaps a place without a global pandemic filling the thoughts and conversations of all Americans.
Sounds like a win to me!

Body

I am thankful this pandemic came right as springtime is arriving.
Imagine if this came during Christmas, preventing us from doing our Christmas shopping and partaking in festivities, or when the temperature was around freezing and no one wanted to go outside.
There is nothing that will make you want to go outside more than being stuck inside a house all day with nine other people, while the sunshine and newly budding flowers of March seem to be calling your name.

This pandemic has reminded me of this beautiful phenomenon called vitamin D.
I have always known vitamin D to be good for our bones and skin, but nevermore have I experienced its mood regulating benefits than these past couple of weeks.
Going for runs and even walks, releasing endorphins and absorbing some of the sun’s rays are enormously beneficial for staying happy and upbeat.
This especially comes in handy just when you think you are going to lose it if someone asks you to type another assignment for them or presumably make another sandwich because apparently kids need lunch every day.
What is that about?

Soul

My personal favorite lesson this time has provided me is the continual need to feed the soul.
No, scrolling through Instagram and watching

The Bachelor

are not exactly what I had in mind.
Spending time in quiet meditation, praying with your family, and recalling all the things you are grateful for are more soul-feeding, if you will.
I’ve enjoyed waking up before the rest of my family gets up and drinking coffee either in silence or with my fiancé.
Being thankful for the time I have to drink coffee leisurely instead of having to rush off to work.
Deciding how I would like to use my time for that day, and thanking God that I even have a day to use in the first place!

Mother Teresa said, "If you want to change the world, go home and love your family."
Our family members, whether we have 10 of them or two of them, are not random.
They have been placed in our lives for a reason.
We are now forced, perhaps for many, to truly spend time with them.
Be with your family and engage them as you never have before.
Challenge them to read more to improve their mind.
Encourage outdoor exercise so they properly take care of their bodies.
Lead by example in these efforts.
It will change your soul and eventually, hopefully, change the world too.
The time for sanctification is now.
Do not let this time go to waste.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = spread disinformation
document number 1: 
Disinformation campaigns are murky blends of truth, lies and sincere beliefs – lessons from the pandemic


The COVID-19 pandemic has spawned an infodemic, a vast and complicated mix of information, misinformation and disinformation.

In this environment, false narratives – the virus was "planned," that it originated as a bioweapon, that COVID-19 symptoms are caused by 5G wireless communications technology – have spread like wildfire across social media and other communication platforms.
Some of these bogus narratives play a role in disinformation campaigns.

The notion of disinformation often brings to mind easy-to-spot propaganda peddled by totalitarian states, but the reality is much more complex.
Though disinformation does serve an agenda, it is often camouflaged in facts and advanced by innocent and often well-meaning individuals.

As a researcher who studies how communications technologies are used during crises, I’ve found that this mix of information types makes it difficult for people, including those who build and run online platforms, to distinguish an organic rumor from an organized disinformation campaign.
And this challenge is not getting any easier as efforts to understand and respond to COVID-19 get caught up in the political machinations of this year’s presidential election.

Rumors, misinformation and disinformation


Rumors are, and have always been, common during crisis events.
Crises are often accompanied by uncertainty about the event and anxiety about its impacts and how people should respond.
People naturally want to resolve that uncertainty and anxiety, and often attempt to do so through collective sensemaking.
It’s a process of coming together to gather information and theorize about the unfolding event.
Rumors are a natural byproduct.

Rumors aren’t necessarily bad.
But the same conditions that produce rumors also make people vulnerable to disinformation, which is more insidious.
Unlike rumors and misinformation, which may or may not be intentional, disinformation is false or misleading information spread for a particular objective, often a political or financial aim.

Disinformation has its roots in the practice of dezinformatsiya used by the Soviet Union’s intelligence agencies to attempt to change how people understood and interpreted events in the world.
It’s useful to think of disinformation not as a single piece of information or even a single narrative, but as a campaign, a set of actions and narratives produced and spread to deceive for political purpose.

Lawrence Martin-Bittman, a former Soviet intelligence officer who defected from what was then Czechoslovakia and later became a professor of disinformation, described how effective disinformation campaigns are often built around a true or plausible core.
They exploit existing biases, divisions and inconsistencies in a targeted group or society.
And they often employ "unwitting agents" to spread their content and advance their objectives.

Black Lake in the Czech Republic was the site of a Soviet-era disinformation campaign against West Germany involving real Nazi documents and a duped Czech television crew.


Regardless of the perpetrator, disinformation functions on multiple levels and scales.
While a single disinformation campaign may have a specific objective – for instance, changing public opinion about a political candidate or policy – pervasive disinformation works at a more profound level to undermine democratic societies.

The case of the ‘Plandemic’ video


Distinguishing between unintentional misinformation and intentional disinformation is a critical challenge.
Intent is often hard to infer, especially in online spaces where the original source of information can be obscured.
In addition, disinformation can be spread by people who believe it to be true.
And unintentional misinformation can be strategically amplified as part of a disinformation campaign.
Definitions and distinctions get messy, fast.

Consider the case of the "Plandemic" video that blazed across social media platforms in May 2020.
The video contained a range of false claims and conspiracy theories about COVID-19.
Problematically, it advocated against wearing masks, claiming they would "activate" the virus, and laid the foundations for eventual refusal of a COVID-19 vaccine.

Though many of these false narratives had emerged elsewhere online, the "Plandemic" video brought them together in a single, slickly produced 26-minute video.
Before being removed by the platforms for containing harmful medical misinformation, the video propagated widely on Facebook and received millions of YouTube views.

As it spread, it was actively promoted and amplified by public groups on Facebook and networked communities on Twitter associated with the anti-vaccine movement, the QAnon conspiracy theory community and pro-Trump political activism.

But was this a case of misinformation or disinformation?
The answer lies in understanding how – and inferring a little about why – the video went viral.

The video’s protagonist was Dr. Judy Mikovits, a discredited scientist who had previously advocated for several false theories in the medical domain – for example, claiming that vaccines cause autism.
In the lead-up to the video’s release, she was promoting a new book, which featured many of the narratives that appeared in the "Plandemic" video.

One of those narratives was an accusation against Dr.
Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
At the time, Fauci was a focus of criticism for promoting social distancing measures that some conservatives viewed as harmful to the economy.
Public comments from Mikovits and her associates suggest that damaging Fauci’s reputation was a specific goal of their campaign.

Dr.
Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, preparing to testify before a Senate hearing.
Fauci was a target of the ‘Plandemic’ conspiracy theory video.


In the weeks leading up to the release of the "Plandemic" video, a concerted effort to lift Mikovits’ profile took shape across several social media platforms.
A new Twitter account was started in her name, quickly accumulating thousands of followers.
She appeared in interviews with hyperpartisan news outlets such as The Epoch Times and True Pundit.
Back on Twitter, Mikovits greeted her new followers with the message: "Soon, Dr Fauci, everyone will know who you ‘really are’."

More recently, Sinclair Broadcast Group, which owns or operates 191 local television stations across the country, had planned to air an interview with Mikovits in which she reiterated the central claims in "Plandemic."
In airing this program, Sinclair would have used the cover and credibility of local news to expose new audiences to these false – and potentially dangerous – narratives.
The company is reconsidering its decision after receiving criticism; however, the interview was reportedly posted for a time on the company’s website and was aired by one station.

This background suggests that Mikovits and her collaborators had several objectives beyond simply sharing her misinformed theories about COVID-19.
These include financial, political and reputational motives.
However, it is also possible that Mikovits is a sincere believer of the information that she was sharing, as were millions of people who shared and retweeted her content online.

What’s ahead


In the United States, as COVID-19 blurs into the presidential election, we’re likely to continue to see disinformation campaigns employed for political, financial and reputational gain.
Domestic activist groups will use these techniques to produce and spread false and misleading narratives about the disease – and about the election.
Foreign agents will attempt to join the conversation, often by infiltrating existing groups and attempting to steer them towards their goals.

[

Deep knowledge, daily.

Sign up for The Conversation’s newsletter.]

For example, there will likely be attempts to use the threat of COVID-19 to frighten people away from the polls.
Along with those direct attacks on election integrity, there are likely to also be indirect effects – on people’s perceptions of election integrity – from both sincere activists and agents of disinformation campaigns.

Efforts to shape attitudes and policies around voting are already in motion.
These include work to draw attention to voter suppression and attempts to frame mail-in voting as vulnerable to fraud.
Some of this rhetoric stems from sincere criticism meant to inspire action to make the electoral systems stronger.
Other narratives, for example unsupported claims of "voter fraud," seem to serve the primary aim of undermining trust in those systems.

History teaches that this blending of activism and active measures, of foreign and domestic actors, and of witting and unwitting agents, is nothing new.
And certainly the difficulty of distinguishing between these is not made any easier in the connected era.
But better understanding these intersections can help researchers, journalists, communications platform designers, policymakers and society at large develop strategies for mitigating the impacts of disinformation during this challenging moment.

This article has been updated to include news about Sinclair Broadcasting and the ‘Plandemic’ video.



####
document number 2: 
Russian disinformation campaign helped spread political conspiracy theory






####
document number 3: 
Mark Zuckerberg gets 'Dear Mark' video from Facebook boycott organizers



The civil rights groups behind the month-long advertising boycott of Facebook turned up public pressure Thursday with the release of an animated "Dear Mark" video.

The message for Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg in the waning days of the Stop Hate for Profit campaign: "You can't wait us out.
This campaign is not going away," ADL CEO Jonathan Greenblatt said in a statement.

The video casts Zuckerberg as unwilling to take action against the spread of racial hatred and white supremacy even as Facebook gives hate groups "the biggest platform they have ever had."

"Dear Mark, there are things we like about Facebook: birthdays, staying in touch, sharing our lives with our friends," the video begins.
"But there’s a more sinister side of Facebook, the one that spreads hate, racism, misinformation and gives extremists a way to communicate and coordinate."

Boycott organizers' message to Facebook:Stop hate speech and harassment

"These issues will not be resolved until Mark Zuckerberg makes the decision to stop profiting from hate," Greenblatt said.

Some 1,100 advertisers, including most recently Walt Disney, Harley Davidson, Novartis, Bayer and Blue Bottle Coffee, stopped buying ads on Facebook and Instagram during the month of July, with some advertisers pulling their spending through the end of the year.

The advertising boycott began shortly before the release of a years-long internal civil rights audit that panned Facebook’s policies and practices, taking particular exception with the company’s decision not to take down inflammatory rhetoric and false claims from President Donald Trump.

Organizers won’t say if the boycott will continue beyond next week.
So far, Facebook has agreed to meet only one of 10 demands, the hiring of an experienced civil rights executive to guide policies and vet products, but at a lower level in the company than civil rights groups wanted.

"There are still nine issues that remain totally unaddressed," Greenblatt said.

Criticism of the company has intensified since nationwide protests over the death of George Floyd brought the issue of racial justice to the forefront.

Facebook maintains it is making strides in identifying and removing misinformation and other harmful and divisive content.
Zuckerberg has defended Facebook’s commitment to free expression, even as competitors take steps to address hate and disinformation on their platforms.

Zuckerberg’s decision to leave up a post in which the president called protesters "thugs" – and warned "When the looting starts, the shooting starts" – has led to employee unrest, with some staging a virtual "walkout."

The boycott has gotten the attention of other platforms.

Twitter this week said it would remove and suspend accounts associated with QAnon, a conspiracy theory group that has supported Trump.

Reddit, which calls itself "the front page of the Internet," banned the subreddit "r/The_Donald," a pro-Trump group with more than 790,000 followers, and other communities that the company said violated its rules on hate speech and harassment.

Google-owned YouTube last month shut down thousands of videos and channels that promoted white supremacy in an attempt to clean up hate speech on the popular video service.

Civil rights groups would not say whether the Stop Hate for Profit campaign would target other platforms after Facebook.

"Those platforms are demonstrating what true leadership looks like.
Meanwhile, Facebook just doesn't get it," Greenblatt said.
"This campaign will not go away by throwing scraps at it.
We need substantive, structural change."



####
document number 4: 
Hunter Biden laptop mystery hints at a Russian disinformation operation, source tells Insider



The New York Post protested decisions by Facebook and Twitter to suppress coverage of the Biden laptop, after the social media platforms concluded the data was unverified and of questionable origin.

The New York Post



The appearance of Hunter Biden's laptop — full of juicy emails and embarrassing images — in the hands of President Trump's lawyer Rudy Giuliani and the New York Post is "too perfect," a professional East European spy chaser tells Insider.


Rudy Giuliani — Trump's lawyer — has repeatedly met with alleged Russian intelligence assets in his hunt for dirt on the Bidens.


Counterintelligence operatives have known since January that emails hacked by the Russians from the Burisma gas company that employed Hunter Biden would surface eventually.
It was merely a question of when.


"I can't imagine the Russians aren't involved in some way," the source told Insider.
"On the small chance they're not, I'm sure they're going to consider it a missed opportunity."


Visit Business Insider's homepage for more stories.



The laptop might be real and contain images and emails embarrassing to White House front runner Joe Biden and his son Hunter.
Perhaps the computer once really belonged to Hunter Biden.
And maybe the emails published October 15 by Rudy Giuliani and The New York Post include real documents.
Even the Biden foundation sticker on the outside of the laptop might be the real thing.

But no matter how the laptop, and whatever is on the hard drive, came to exist, the situation looks a lot like a classic Russian intelligence operation, according to an Estonian intelligence official with extensive experience in combating Russian spies.
In a typical Russian disinformation operation, real documents are salted with forged or manipulated information and then presented in a way that news media — and social media — cannot resist.

Take the complex but clumsy way the laptop came to the Post, via a partially-sighted computer repair shop owner.

"It's just too perfect.
A laptop is dropped off to a blind computer repairman in the name of Hunter Biden — in the middle of a presidential election — that happens to be filled with extensive documents along with videos of sex and drug use, and it ends up in the hands of the president's lawyer, who publicly admits to working closely with a Ukrainian official that the Trump administration itself has sanctioned as a Russian intelligence asset attempting to interfere in the presidential campaign," said the official, who cannot be named for security reasons.

Giuliani has repeatedly met with an accused Russian intelligence asset


Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani claims he received the computer from the computer shop in Delaware after it was abandoned in April 2019.
The shop owner, who is legally blind but claims Hunter Biden personally gave him the laptop for repair, told the Washington Post that he had repeatedly tried to contact Biden to return the computer.
Eventually, he searched its contents, became concerned, and contacted members of Congress, Giuliani, and, apparently, the FBI.

Giuliani has repeatedly met with Ukrainian lawmaker Andriy Derkach looking for information about Hunter Biden's role on the board of Burisma, a natural gas firm, from 2014 to 2019.
Derkach was sanctioned by the US government in September after he was accused of being a Russian intelligence asset intent on interfering in the November elections.

The New York Post said it was first told of the laptop's existence in September by former Trump advisor Steve Bannon.
It later received the actual information from Giuliani, who is now Trump's personal lawyer.
The Post would likely give the laptop a sympathetic examination because the paper is owned by Rupert Murdoch, who also owns the vehemently pro-Trump Fox News network.

Bannon was arrested in August on fraud and money laundering charges.
And Giuliani has seen two close Ukrainian associates — Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman — arrested on unrelated fraud and money laundering charges.

'The Russians will think it so perfect that they won't care if he believes the shit or not because they know he will pass it along either way'


A crew of unofficial American presidential surrogates, on a search for incriminating documents in Ukraine against a political opponent, would be an attractive target for Russian intelligence, the Estonian official said.

"Of course they're sending Giuliani nonsense just to see if it gets noticed," said the official.
"It's exactly what an operative would be looking for: You don't need to convince the FBI or CIA or reporters at The New York Times.
You just have to convince Giuliani.
And he very much wants to be convinced, or maybe he doesn't need to believe the information is true, I don't know.
But I do know the Russians will think it so perfect that they won't care if he believes the shit or not because they know he will pass it along either way."

The New York Times reported that Burisma had been hacked in January.
Burisma emails were believed to have been taken by hackers working for Russian intelligence at that time.

Security officials have known for months the hacked emails would show up


"So we have known these emails would eventually show up — again, I don't know if the laptop started as real or not — so someone would have all the emails they need to put on a laptop to make it look like Biden's," the official said. "
Now, if this is really a Russian disinformation operation, they will seed fake emails or videos that will be considered incriminating into a dump of what seems legitimate and might be verified.
This is what they tried to do to [French President Emmanuel] Macron in 2017."


How the Post played it on Day One.

The New York Post


"Now, if this is really a Russian disinformation operation, they will seed fake emails or videos that will be considering incriminating into a dump of what seems legitimate and might be verified," the official added.
"We know hackers close to [Russian military intelligence] stole the Burisma emails, we know that Giuliani works with a Russian intelligence asset, we know the laptop has, to put it mildly, suspicious origins.
And what little technical data they have provided about the emails and the hard drive itself doesn't make a lot of sense if this was all real."

The official concluded: "I can't imagine the Russians aren't involved in some way.
On the small chance they're not, I'm sure they're going to consider it a missed opportunity."

Read more:

What it's like when the Russians hack your company and turn you into a fake news conspiracy story on state TV

European intelligence agencies are deploying resources to track QAnon as the conspiracy theory spreads beyond the US, sources say


Two crossed lines that form an 'X'.
It indicates a way to close an interaction, or dismiss a notification.



####
document number 5: 
2014-2016 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa


The 2014-2016 Ebola outbreak in West Africa has ended.
Visit the Ebola Outbreak section for information on current Ebola outbreaks.

On March 23, 2014, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported cases of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in the forested rural region of southeastern Guinea.
The identification of these early cases marked the beginning of the West Africa Ebola epidemic, the largest in history.

Summary


The initial case, or index patient, was reported in December 2013.
An 18-month-old boy from a small village in Guinea is believed to have been infected by bats.
After five additional cases of fatal diarrhea occurred in that area, an official medical alert was issued on January 24, 2014, to the district health officials.
The Ebola virus soon spread to Guinea’s capital city of Conakry, and on March 13, 2014, the Ministry of Health in Guinea issued an alert for an unidentified illness.
Shortly after, the Pasteur Institute in France confirmed the illness as EVD caused by

Zaire ebolavirus

.
On March 23, 2014, with 49 confirmed cases and 29 deaths, the WHO officially declared an outbreak of EVD.

Weak surveillance systems and poor public health infrastructure contributed to the difficulty surrounding the containment of this outbreak and it quickly spread to Guinea’s bordering countries, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
By July 2014, the outbreak spread to the capitals of all three countries.
This was the first time EVD extended out from more isolated, rural areas and into densely populated urban centers, providing an unprecedented opportunity for transmission.

On August 8, 2014, WHO declared the deteriorating situation in West Africa a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), which is designated only for events with a risk of potential international spread or that require a coordinated international response.
Over the duration of the epidemic, EVD spread to seven more countries: Italy, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Later secondary infection, mainly in a healthcare setting, occurred in Italy, Mali, Nigeria, and the United States.

The scope of this outbreak, both in terms of cases and geography, can be attributed to the unprecedented circulation of EVD into crowded urban areas, increased mobilization across borders, and conflicts between key infection control practices and prevailing cultural and traditional practices in West Africa.
Engaging local leaders in prevention programs and messaging, along with careful policy implementation at the national and global level, helped to eventually contain the spread of the virus and put an end to this outbreak.

Liberia was first declared Ebola-free in May 2015.
Additional cases were found and treated, and the country was again declared Ebola-free in September 2015.
More cases were discovered in November 2015.
On January 14, 2016, Liberia again announced it was Ebola-free; however, cases were detected in March and April of 2016, and Liberia made its final declaration on June 1, 2016.

After an initial declaration in November 2015, Sierra Leone announced a new case of EVD in January 2016 and declared it was Ebola-free on March 17, 2016.
In Guinea, the first end of outbreak declaration was in December 2015, but additional cases were discovered in March and April of 2016.
Guinea was finally declared Ebola-free in June 2016.
[1] Two and a half years after the first case was discovered, the outbreak ended with more than 28,600 cases and 11,325 deaths.

Ebola in the United States


Overall, eleven people were treated for Ebola in the United States during the 2014-2016 epidemic.
On September 30, 2014, CDC confirmed the first travel-associated case of EVD diagnosed in the United States in a man who traveled from West Africa to Dallas, Texas.
The patient (the index case) died on October 8, 2014.
Two healthcare workers who cared for him in Dallas tested positive for EVD.
Both recovered.

On October 23, 2014, a medical aid worker who had volunteered in Guinea was hospitalized in New York City with suspected EVD.
The diagnosis was confirmed by the CDC the next day.
The patient recovered.

Seven other people were cared for in the United States after they were exposed to the virus and became ill while in West Africa, the majority of whom were medical workers.
They were transported by chartered aircraft from West Africa to hospitals in the United States.
Six of these patients recovered, one died.

[2]


CDC Response


CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center in July 2014 to help coordinate technical assistance and disease control activities with partners.
CDC personnel deployed to West Africa to assist with response efforts, including surveillance, contact tracing, data management, laboratory testing, and health education.
CDC staff also provided support with logistics, staffing, communication, analytics, and management.

To prevent cross-border transmission, travelers leaving West Africa were screened at airports.
Exit screening helped identify those at risk for EVD and prevent the spread of the disease to other countries.
The United States also implemented enhanced entry screening for travelers coming from Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Mali by routing them to designated airports better able to assess travelers for risk.

[3]


During the height of the response, CDC trained 24,655 healthcare workers in West Africa on infection prevention and control practices.

[4]

In the United States, more than 6,500 people were trained during live training events throughout the response.
In addition, laboratory capacity was expanded in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone with 24 laboratories able to test for Ebola virus by the end of 2015.

[5]


Impact


On March 29, 2016, the WHO lifted the PHEIC status on West Africa’s Ebola situation.
The impact this epidemic had on the world, and particularly West Africa, is significant.
A total of 28,616 cases of EVD and 11,310 deaths were reported in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.
There were an additional 36 cases and 15 deaths that occurred when the outbreak spread outside of these three countries.
The table below shows the distribution of cases and deaths in countries with widespread transmission and countries affected by the epidemic.




3,814


3,358


2,544




10,678


3,163


4,810




14,124


8,706


3,956




20


19


8




28,652


15,261


11,325





* While there were 11 patients with EVD in total treated in the United States, only four patients became ill after they arrived in the United States, either after exposure in West Africa or in a healthcare setting.

Graphs of reported cases, called epidemic curves, show the rate (incidence) of new, probable, and confirmed cases over the duration of the outbreak in the three West African countries with widespread transmission, Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.

Healthcare workers caring for patients with EVD were among those at highest risk for contracting the disease.
During the epidemic, Liberia lost 8% of its doctors, nurses, and midwives to EVD.

[6]

In addition to the devastating effects on the healthcare workforce in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, the Ebola epidemic severely impacted the provision of healthcare services and caused setbacks in the treatment and control of HIV, tuberculosis, measles, and malaria in these countries.

[7]


The epidemic also had a great impact on children.
Nearly 20% of all EVD cases occurred in children under 15 years of age, and an estimated 30,000 children became orphans during this epidemic.
As funding and logistics previously dedicated to child vaccination campaigns were redirected to Ebola response or postponed to avoid public gatherings, routine immunizations decreased by 30%, further putting children at risk of getting vaccine-preventable diseases.

[8]

,


[9]


The epidemic has been estimated to cost a total of $4.3 billion USD.

[10]

Investments in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone dramatically decreased.
Similarly, the countries experienced a substantial loss in private sector growth, decline in agricultural production leading to concerns about food security, and a decrease in cross-border trade as restrictions on movements, goods, and services increased.

[11]

,


[12]

,


[13]


Current Guidance


While the spread of EVD in West Africa has been controlled, additional cases may continue to occur from time to time.
However, because of ongoing surveillance and strengthened response capabilities, the affected countries now have the experience and tools to rapidly identify cases and limit the spread of the disease.

CDC no longer recommends that U.S. residents avoid nonessential travel to Guinea, Liberia, or Sierra Leone.
Although there is believed to be no risk of EVD to travelers in these countries, travelers should, as usual, avoid contact with sick people, dead bodies, or blood and body fluids.



####
document number 6: 
Zika virus cases spread in Latin America, Caribbean



Haiti, Ecuador and Brazil have announced that they have been hit by an outbreak of the Zika virus, a mosquito-borne ailment that causes birth defects and is rapidly spreading through Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Zika virus is transmitted by Aedes species mosquitoes, which also spread dengue and chikungunya viruses.
Zika causes a mild illness with fever, rash, joint pain and conjunctivitis, with symptoms usually lasting under a week.

But in pregnant women, the virus can spread to the fetus and cause brain shrinkage - a rare condition called microcephaly that severely limits a child's intellectual and physical development - or death.


Brazil has been the hardest hit, documenting more than 3,500 cases of microcephaly between October 2015 and January 2016.

Four of those cases have recently been analysed, showing that babies were infected with the Zika virus while they were in the womb and that it reached their brains.

Two of the cases involved miscarriages, and two of the babies died soon after birth.
The Brazilian government said on Saturday it was directing funds to a biomedical research centre to help develop a vaccine against the virus.

Ecuador confirms cases

Ecuador said on Friday it has detected two new cases of the Zika virus in the country.
Officials had previously detected four people who arrived from other countries with the disease.
But this is the first time it has been transmitted on Ecuadorian soil, said Veronica Espinosa, deputy cabinet minister responsible for monitoring outbreaks.

"We have now detected, confirmed by laboratory tests, the first two native cases.
That is, we now have cases of the virus being transmitted by mosquito bites that happened in Ecuadoran territory," she told a press conference.

First Haiti detection

Also on Friday, Haiti's Public Health Minister Florence Duperval Guillaume said there have been five confirmed cases of the Zika virus in the country.
All the cases are in the area of Port-au-Prince, the overcrowded capital.

The United States on Friday warned pregnant women to avoid travel to 14 countries and territories in the Caribbean and Latin America due to the virus.

The level two travel alert applies to Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Martinique, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, Venezuela and Puerto Rico.



####
document number 7: 
Jessi Slaughter Cyberbulling Controversy


Overview


The Jessi Slaughter Cyberbullying Controversy refers to series of abusive posts made toward Damien Leonhardt (formerly known as Jessica Leonhardt and the internet aliases Jessi Slaughter and KerliGirl13).
At the age of 10, Leonhardt became a target of a massive 4chan raid in July 2010 after launching a public tirade against the image board community in a series of YouTube videos.
At the time, many believed rumors that she was in a sexual relationship with Bood on the Dance Floor singer Dahvie Vanity (real name: Jesus David Torres).
The feud quickly led to the creation of hundreds of image macros and remix videos mocking Jessica and her father, who later became involved in the drama, and prompted one of the first public discussions of cyberbullying as a serious issue in the news media.
Between 2013 and 2020, Leonhardt publicly accused Torres of sexual assault, which Torres denied.
More than 20 women have accused Torres of assault.

Online History


On July 10th, 2010, StickyDrama user tdomf_e8e13 posted an accusation

[16]

that the vocalist of electronica band Blood On The Dance Floor

[2]

(BOTDF) Dahvie Vanity was pursuing a sexual relationship with the underaged Jessica Leonhardt.

"BOTDF lead singer Dahvie Vanity is at it again!
He was apparently having a "friend with benefits" type of relationship with self-proclamed "scene queen" Jessi Slaughter who is only 11!
I have also talked to other people who say that they did fuck last sumer when she was 10.


On July 12th, Leonhardt posted a response on StickyDrama

[6]

, denying the claims.

"People STFU This Is A Very Private Matter And Im Dealing With It.
This Post Ruined Muh Life… And Yes That Was Muh Status On Myspace!
Cuzz I Saw A Squril Fall Out Of A Tree In Muh BakYard!
It Was Funnah To Meh!
Muh Mom Has Read This And Is Talking To Dahvie On The Fone Right Nao!
So I Would Shut Your Mouths If I Were You!
I Have Muh Life And Dahvie Has His.
We Are Just Friends!"

Feud With 4chan


On July 14th, 2010, a video of Leonhardt complaining about being harassed was posted on the /b/ (random board) on 4chan (re-upload shown below, left).
Shortly after, Leonhardt was inundated with attacks on the microblogging site Tumblr.
Later that night, Leonhardt uploaded a response video in which her father warned attackers that they would found proclaiming "you done goofed" (shown below, right).



Anonymous soon uncovered her personal information including phone number, address and her Twitter account.
People soon began flooding the Leonhardt' household with prank calls

[9]

(shown below, left) and hate e-mails.
In a Stickam video uploaded on July 15th (shown below, right), Jessi is seen answering the phone during one of the prank calls.


Following the relentless waves of harassment carried out by the trolls, Jessi posted a tearful response video on YouTube, in which her father Gene Leonhardt suddenly comes into the shot and delivers an angry rant.


Unwittingly, he delivered a highly exploitable speech that quickly became adapted into catchphrases and image macros including "You done goofed," "backtraced," "cyberpolice," and "consequences will never be the same."
Shortly after, single serving sites like YouDunGoofd.com

[19]

and BecauseIBacktracedIt.com

[12]

were launched.


Hoax: Jessi Slaughter Given PCP


Circa 3:00pm (EST) on July 16th, 2010, baseless rumors of "Jessi Slaughter Given PCP by Her Father"

[6]

began to rise rapidly on YouTube and Google Trends.

[7]

The malicious hoax was picked up by social bookmarking services and blogs, where it was soon revealed as mere disinformation

[8]

propagated by the trolls using tactics like Googlebombing.

On YouTube, viewers followed up with their own remixes, re-enactments and other commentaries on Jessi and her father's rant.



Police Investigation


According to Jessi's mom, Dianne Leonheardt, in addition to the prank calls placed after her phone number was spread on the internet, the family began receiving death threats.
Because of this, Gawker

[21]

reported on the evening of July 18th that Jessi had been placed under police protection soon after the video went viral.
The local sheriff has begun a criminal investigation into this calls and a court has ordered her to stay off the internet until at least July 21st.
In addition, the family is currently under constant police surveillance.

Several hours later, Gawker updated the article to note that a spokeswoman from the Marion County, Florida sheriff's department stated that, while there is a current investigation involving an eleven year old girl, they are looking into the existence of pornographic pictures of her and the prank calls referencing them.
The spokeswoman was also quoted as saying "There have been no death threats or threats of harm in any way."

The latest footage uploaded on August 2nd, 2010 allegedly shows a heated argument between Jessi and her dad, recorded by another Tinychat user who was logged in the same chat room during her side exchange with father.


Child Abuse Charges


On March 25th, 2011, The Daily What

[20]

reported that Gene Leonhardt appeared in court to plead not guilty to child abuses charges.
He was released on a $5000 bond.


According to an official report

[22]

filed by a Marion County Sheriff’s Office deputy, Loenhardt supposedly slapped Jessica in the mouth during a heated argument, causing her to bleed.
Leonhardt, who police say appeared intoxicated, claims he struck his daughter after she punched him, and that the blood on her face was "theatrical blood."


On July 7th, 2011, additional police reports were released by Marion County Sheriff’s Office and The Smoking Gun

[23]

published an article revealing the details of Jessi's behavioral issues and Gene Leonhardt's arrest earlier in February.

4chan vs.
Gawker


Included in Adrian Chen's series of Gawker

[24]

articles about the situation was one entitled "The Art of Trolling: Inside a 4chan Smear Campaign."
After outlining 4chan's plan of attack against Dahvie Vanity with screenshots and links, Chen linked to a chatroom, daring readers to troll it.
Enraged, /b/ set out to take down Gawker's main servers around noon on July 19th.
When the site did not go down, an attack against Adrian Chen was launched.
Gawker

[25]

posted an article detailing the entire plot, stating that they were not afraid.
Coverage of the attempt to take down Gawker appeared on the Village Voice blog

[26]

and New York Magzine's Daily Intel.

[27]


Jessi's Mother Speaks


On July 20th, Momlogic

[28]

interviewed Jessi's mother; revealing her own lack of parental supervision.

Excerpt:

ml: Were you aware that your daughter had been making and posting these videos online?
DL: Jessica has a webcam and a computer.
All of her friends have webcams, too, so they video chat with each other.
I knew she'd made a video to apply for "America's Got Talent."
She sings and sent an audition video in.
I had no idea she was making other videos.
I have seen her chatting with her friends, but not making videos.
ml: When did you find out about the videos, and what was your reaction?
DL: The officers had said there were videos, but Jess denied making them.
Then my mother-in-law called and said there were videos.
But I haven't watched them.
I can't be in the room 24/7.
We tried to talk to Jess last night, but she got very upset all over again.
I am trying to get her back to normal.
It's taken a very emotional toll on her.
I don't know if she made these videos or not, but she says she didn't.
Right now, I am trying to figure out what's real and what's not.
This has been very difficult to deal with.

Jessi on Good Morning America


On July 22nd Jessi appeared on Good Morning America to discuss how the reaction to her videos has changed her life and revealed she would begin counseling.


4chan prepared for a mention from the show with Operation /b/ipolar, and played the Good Morning America theme in the background of the /b/ board with a stickied thread featuring this image.
That day, "4chan is family oriented" became a trending search on Google Insights.

Jessi's Apology


On August 11th, 2011, YouTuber HiroKasumi uploaded a video titled "Jessi Slaughter Apologies (2011)" where Jessica apologizes to the band Blood on the Dance Floor for accusing them of rape.
She claims she is currently in foster care after going through several mental institutions.
The video is recorded by a friend of hers since she has no computer privileges


Death of Jessi's Father


On August 14th, 2011, Jessi's mother posted a status update on her Facebook account claiming that her husband Gene Leonhardt passed away on August 11th, the same day her apology video was uploaded, due to a massive heart attack:

Gene C. Leonhardt, 53, of Dunnellon died Aug.
11, 2011, at home.


On Jan 23rd, 2012, Jessi Slaughter created a new YouTube account under the name "ShinigamiKilla."
On March 7th, Leonhardt created the "Gorgonize The Masses" Tumblr

[32]

blog, featuring several posts answering questions from fans.
On April 8th, the @DamienAkuma Twitter

[31]

account was created, which included several tweets referencing the mythical creature Slender Man.
The account included a description hinting that Leonhardt would be changing her name to "Damien."

On April 27th, a video titled "Lovely – MorningStar [A work in progress]" was uploaded to the channel, which included a song written by Leonhardt accompanied by several photographs of herself (shown below, left).
On May 28th, a thread was created on the cosmetic-related GuruGossip Forums

[30]

, which linked to the Shinigamikilla channel and claimed that Leonhardt had become transgender.
On June 3rd, Leonhardt uploaded a video (shown below, right) announcing she would be answering questions from viewers but warned not to ask questions about her deceased father.
On June 5th, the Internet culture news blog The Daily Dot

[29]

published an article titled "Controversial Cyberbully Victim Jessica Leonhardt returns to YouTube, remarking that Leonhardt appeared to be surprisingly happy in many of the new videos.

On March 25th, 2020, Leonhardt appeared on Chris Hansen's YouTube show "Have A Seat With Chris Hansen" and publicly accused Jesus David Torres of sexual assault when they were 10.
The video received more than 235,000 views.


Insider Report


On July 2nd, 2020, Leonhardt was the subject of Insider

[33]

article about their abuse by Torres.
The article states that more 21 women have also come forward against Torres.
Insider states:

Accusations of Torres sexually assaulting women and girls circulated online throughout Blood on the Dance Floor's existence, from 2007 to 2016, and after, but Torres has never been prosecuted.
In 2019, the rumors culminated in a HuffPost report detailing 21 on-the-record accusations of sexual assault against Torres, who maintains active social-media profiles and continues to release music under new aliases.
For years, Leonhardt, now 21, quietly observed the growing number of accusations and write-ups about Torres.
As the name Jessi Slaughter faded into obscurity, Leonhardt began identifying as nonbinary, using the pronouns they and them, and going by the name Damien.
After receiving therapy and other mental-health treatment, Leonhardt began to tell friends and online followers about their experience with Torres from a different perspective, one that includes accusations of child sex abuse.

Search Interest



Know Your Meme Store


External References



####
document number 8: 
SARS Pandemic: How the Virus Spread Around the World in 2003


In November 2002, doctors in the Guangdong province of southeastern China began to see the first cases of what would become known as SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Over the next several months, 8,096 people in 26 countries contracted the new viral illness, leading to 774 deaths.
Although the slow reporting of initial SARS cases helped the illness spread, globally-enforced medical practices eventually helped end the outbreak.

The reasons for the slow reporting of SARS are complicated.
Doctors had never seen the viral illness before, and at first, those in Guangdong province thought the SARS cases they were seeing might be atypical pneumonia.

"Nobody was aware of it, including probably people in Beijing," says Arnold S. Monto, a professor of epidemiology and global public health at the University of Michigan.
Even after doctors began to realize that there was something new about the illnesses they were seeing, "it was kept locally for a while, which was one of the problems."

There were also reports that officials may have encouraged doctors not to report new cases when SARS spread to Beijing.
In April 2003,

Time

magazine obtained a letter from Jiang Yanyong, a physician at an army hospital in Beijing, alleging the actual number of SARS cases in the capital city was much higher than the official count.
This turned out to be true, and Chinese officials released the real numbers that month (and also began to monitor Jiang).

SARS Originates in China, Jumps to Hong Kong


People wearing masks to protect against the SARS virus in Hong Kong's Mass Transit Railway on March 31, 2003.
The death toll at the time of this photograph was 13 with 530 people infected.


SARS jumped from mainland China to Hong Kong in February 2003 when Liu Jianlun, a medical professor from Guangdong who unknowingly had SARS, checked into Room 911 at Hong Kong's Metropole Hotel.
The 64-year-old professor soon became sick from the illness and went to the hospital, where he died within two weeks.
But during his short stay at the hotel, he unwittingly infected several other guests.
Those people then took SARS with them to Singapore, Toronto and Hanoi.
(The hotel has since renamed Room 911 because of the stigma.)

"It’s a remarkable story, and it also identifies an issue which was clearly identified as a problem in 2003," Monto says.
"And that is that there were what we call ‘superspreaders’—people who seem to infect a lot of other people."
Scientists still don’t understand the biological reason why some infected people spread illness more than others do in the same situation, but they were a major factor in the spread of SARS.

"The other very important characteristic of SARS was the association or the particular problem of hospital-based infections, healthcare worker infections," Monto says.
"And this was a manifestation of the fact that sick patients and particularly very sick patients shed a lot of virus into the environment."
During the SARS outbreak, medical professionals like Dr.
Liu were at an increased risk of passing the illness to people outside of hospitals.

SARS Transmission Stopped by Quarantines and International Cooperation


Doctors and hospital staff talking inside a newly built special wards for SARS patients at the Infectious Disease Hospital in New Delhi, India on May 1, 2003.


Illnesses like SARS create panic because there are so many unknowns.
In the midst of the outbreak, scientists weren’t certain if they would be able to eliminate SARS completely, or if it would become a seasonal illness like the flu, which kills hundreds of thousands of people per year.
Luckily, doctors and scientists were able to completely eliminate SARS by isolating and quarantining people until the virus passed out of their system and they could no longer transmit it to others.

Because of international cooperation to isolate and quarantine people with SARS, the World Health Organization and affected countries were able to contain SARS by July 2003.
After that year, the only SARS cases came from isolated laboratory outbreaks where scientists were studying the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) that causes the illness.
Once again, officials contained these infections through isolation and quarantines.

China and Hong Kong suffered the most during the SARS outbreak.
In China, there were 5,327 cases and 349 deaths; and in Hong Kong, there were 1,755 cases and 299 deaths, according to the World Health Organization.
One of the lessons of the SARS outbreak was that in the future, China needed to have more transparency between its provinces and its national government.

Lessons Learned From SARS


Workers disinfect the waiting room of a Beijing railway station in the fight against SARS, on May 25, 2003.


"SARS was an alert as to how bad it could be," Monto says.
"China has had the experience over the last 15 years of dealing with small outbreaks of avian influenza—which have not transmitted extensively, but have continued to occur in China—so they’ve learned how to deal with these."

Preparedness for pandemics has also improved on a global level, says Anne W. Rimoin, a professor of epidemiology at the UCLA School of Public Health who specializes in the Ebola virus.

"Since the SARS outbreak, we’ve seen several other outbreaks," she says.
"We’ve had MERS, we’ve had the H1N1, that’s swine flu; we’ve had chikungunya, we’ve had Zika, and we’ve had several Ebola outbreaks since that time.
So I think that the world has just gotten much better at coordinating response."

In December 2019, a new coronavirus emerged in China.
By February 2, 2020, death tolls from the new virus in mainland China exceeded that of the 2002-2003 SARS epidemic, according to China’s Health Commission.



####
document number 9: 
In photos: Living in Liberia’s Ebola quarantine towns


Photos by Frances Kennedy, WFP


In Liberia, one of the countries most affected by the Ebola outbreak, neighbourhoods like Dolo’s Town and West Point have been quarantined to contain the spread of the virus.


The quarantine has since been lifted, but for a period of 21 days, it changed daily life for thousands of Liberians.

The sealed-off roads and areas meant restricted movement for nearly 50,000 people.
Disruptions in the food trade made food increasingly expensive and harder to come by.
Children couldn’t get to school.
Parents couldn’t get to work.
And labour shortages are putting the upcoming harvest season at serious risk.

World Food Programme provided assistance to nine counties of Liberia for about 39,000 affected people, delivering life-saving supplies like food and medical equipment.

These photos reveal what life was like living in the Ebola quarantine zones in Liberia, and how WFP is helping.

Health workers at an Ebola treatment center in Monrovia


Health workers wear full personal protective equipment in an Ebola treatment center run by Medecins Sans Frontieres in Monrovia.
WFP’s logistics arm has provided support and mobile storage units to MSF as it expands this centre to cope with an ever increasing caseload of patients with the virus or those who are suspected of having it.

WFP assistance arrives in quarantined West Point neighbourhood


In urban areas, like the congested West Point slum on Monrovia’s beachfront, distributing large quantities of food is a challenge.
There is just one sealed road in and out and food distributions happen on the roadside.
Any traffic hitch can cause delays.


Taking measures to stop the spread of Ebola

WFP staff and local partners need to take increased health and hygiene precautions as they provide food assistance in Ebola-affected areas.
The Ebola virus is transmitted by body fluids, including sweat.
Gloves are crucial, and some humanitarian workers also wear masks.
Everyone is encouraged to wear long sleeved shirts to avoid skin contact.


Children in quarantined Dolo’s Town area

Schools are closed in Liberia.
And in the quarantined area of Dolo’s Town near the capital Monrovia, mothers are not taking any chances.
Janet Koiwood does not let her kids run around playing with friends as they normally do but makes them stay close to home.
WFP food rations are vital as supplies in her home and in the village dwindle due to restrictions on movement.

WFP food assistance distributed in Liberia’s restricted areas


Many Liberian families take their rations home in wheelbarrows as each of these bags of rice weighs 50 kilos.
Joseph T.
Harris, father of six, has a job at a fueling station at the airport but is in one of the restricted areas so he cannot get to work.
WFP has so far delivered food for quarantined communities in nine counties of Liberia for about 39,000 affected people.


Handwashing

Handwashing is crucial to helping prevent the spread of the Ebola virus.
Families and businesses have installed buckets with chlorinated water at the entrances to homes, shops and offices.
All people receiving WFP food must first wash their hands thoroughly.
People are encouraged to wear long-sleeved shirts when possible.


Women living in restricted Dolo’s Town area

WFP provides rations for families of five comprising yellow split peas for protein, oil for cooking and rice as a staple.
Residents are not allowed to leave to go and buy food on the markets and there are no food supplies coming in.
In other areas, prices of food are rising sharply on local market because of the disruption to trade.


Residents fear losing their jobs

Veronika Coupo waits to pick up her rice, split peas and oil from a distribution in Monrovia.
She has a job as a nanny in a wealthy suburb across town, but was unable to work because the West Point slum area where she lived was quarantined.
She worries about losing her job and how she can support her three school-aged children.



####
document number 10: 
95,000 stranded at sea: What happens when a cruise ship becomes a hot zone


The last place anyone wants to be during the coronavirus pandemic is stranded aboard a cruise ship, where disease can spread with lightning speed.

This week, the last 3,500 or so passengers aboard three cruise ships stuck at sea will be coming into port at last.
The

Pacific Princess

and the

MSC Magnifica,

are scheduled to berth today in California and France with 1,880 passengers, who will be transferred into home isolation.
The

Costa Deliziosa

had to evacuate one passenger with health issues last week at the port in Marsala, Italy.
The ship’s nearly 2,000 passengers were reportedly quarantined until a coronavirus test came back negative, and the ship is said to be disembarking most of them in Barcelona today before returning to Genoa, Italy with its remaining 453 Italian citizens.
There are still 124 additional ships in U.S. waters with 95,000 crew members of varying nationalities on board with no clear timeline for when and how they will all return to their home countries, some of which have closed their borders.

(

Related: How hard will the coronavirus hit the travel industry?

)

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.



Left:

Passengers of the Grand Princess cruise ship peer out onto San Francisco Bay on March 9, as it heads to dock at the Port of Oakland with 21 people on board who tested positive for coronavirus.

Right:

Members of the U.S. Coast Guard load personal protective equipment into a

… Read More

Photograph by Gabrielle Lurie, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Petty Officer 3rd Class Taylor Bacon, U.S. Coast Guard District 11, AP (Right)

Since the March 14 no-sail order issued by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the agency has helped bring more than 12,000 citizens and foreign nationals into home isolation.
At least 17 cruises have had passengers testing positive for COVID-19.
"We’ve even had people coming back positive from Nile River cruises," says Cindy Friedman, a medical epidemiologist who leads the CDC’s cruise ship team.

Even when quarantined inside their cabin, passengers are not necessarily shielded from infection, says Joacim Rocklöv , an epidemiologist at Umeå University in Sweden.
Rocklöv estimates that a single person on board the

Diamond Princess

cruise ship in January infected 15 others, a rate four times higher than observed in Wuhan, China, where the new coronavirus virus first emerged.
Rocklöv suggests this could’ve been partly due to a "super spreader" event, such as a social engagement on-board where the first infected passenger or passengers mingled with uninfected ones.

Passengers began to disembark from the Grand Princess cruise ship at the Port of Oakland in Oakland, California on March 10.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


(

Related: Here’s how to fight germs wherever you go.

)

The virus is primarily transmitted through small respiratory droplets, which can spread on surfaces, through close contact, and, possibly, the ship’s ventilation system.
Crew members packed up to eight to a room and delivering food to passengers can also expedite its spread.
The disease has been particularly insidious because as many as a quarter of people who get it may not show symptoms, and infected individuals can spread the virus to others before they show symptoms.
Because cruise ship passengers tend to be older than the overall U.S. population, they are also most susceptible to becoming critically ill or dying.

Michael Callahan , a medical doctor and infectious disease expert at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, participated in medical evacuations of the

Diamond Princess

and

Grand Princess

cruise ships.
He says that if it were up to him, cruises around the world should have been immediately evacuated and passengers and crews quarantined inside hotels for 14 days.
"You’ve got to break the chain of infection," he says.

Diamond Princess

evacuation


The true scale of the threat of COVID-19 first became clear with the outbreak aboard the

Diamond Princess

.
The infection is thought to have been brought on board by an 80-year old Chinese man who had disembarked by the time his positive test came back on February 1.
Even after guests were sequestered in their cabins and the ship docked in Yokohama, Japan, the disease continued to spread among the 2,666 passengers and 1,045 crew.
The first 10 cases were confirmed on February 5.
Japanese authorities removed sick passengers one by one and treated them at a local hospital, but passengers were otherwise confined on board.



Left:

Members of the Filipino Community Center protest perceived lack of health protections for Filipino Grand Princess workers as the ship stopped in San Francisco to restock supplies before sailing back to sea.

… Read More

Photograph by Liz Hafalia, The San Francisco Chronicle, Getty Images (Left) and Photograph by Tim Rue, Bloomberg, Getty Images (Right)

Deluged with emails and phone calls from passengers and family members, the CDC waited a week to authorize a quarantine operation, at which point more than 200 passengers had tested positive along with 20 crew members, including many in food service.
Inconsistent testing and delays in receiving the results, however, meant that many more were likely infected.

The U.S. had never conducted a large-scale mission to evacuate citizens from abroad amid an infectious disease outbreak.
Doing it on a cruise ship?
That was new, too.
"There was no rulebook," says Callahan.

A little-known agency inside the Department of Health and Human Services known as the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response kicked into action.
Officials there cobbled together teams of doctors, nurse practitioners, nurses and pharmacists, and brought in Callahan and another infectious disease expert, both veterans of Ebola hot zones in African nations.

(

Related: Learn how the coronavirus compares to Ebola, flu, and other outbreaks.)


James Lawler , a medical doctor and co-executive director of the Global Center for Health Security at the University of Nebraska Medical Center, got the call on a Tuesday and was on a plane to Japan the next day, having plunked down a $35,000 government grant to buy 21 pressurized bio-containment suits.
"That’s a lot of extra carry-on bags," he says.

Because of the virus’s high fatality rate—as high as one to two percent—the team treated the entire cruise ship as a "hot zone," meaning they had to use the strictest infection control procedures.
A tent set up at the farthest end of the dock was used to remove and decontaminate or dispose of their gear upon stepping off the vessel.

Doctors scrutinized

Diamond Princess’

s manifest to identify American citizens and checked on each one, beginning with passengers most at-risk, including the elderly and those with conditions such as diabetes or mobility issues.
A pharmacist based in the ship’s library maintained radio contact, obtaining appropriate prescription refills from Japanese pharmacies.

Once cleared, 329 Americans wearing masks were then taken by bus to two cargo planes and flown to quarantine on military bases in the United States.
Eleven passengers would end up testing positive by the time they arrived and were flown on to Nebraska.
Three more would fall ill later.
An additional 111 Americans were either hospitalized in Japan or remained there for other reasons.

Overall, the

Diamond Princess

outbreak infected 712 passengers and killed 9.
Had the passengers been isolated and quarantined on February 3, those actions likely would have prevented at least 76 infections, according to an analysis in the

Journal of Travel Medicine

.

A passenger cheers as medical personnel begin to move travelers from the Grand Princess cruise ship onto airplanes at Oakland International Airport.
Photograph by JOSH EDELSON, AFP, Getty Images


"It was absolutely the right move to get Americans off," Lawler says.

The March 8 cruise ship evacuation of the

Grand Princess

, which began 50 miles off the coast of California, proved to be even more harrowing for rescue workers.
Amid rough waters, the medical team had to leap from a small Coast Guard vessel to a lifeboat and on to a ladder dangling from the cruise ship—all while wearing clumsy bio-containment suits.

"A mistake would have resulted in severe injury, or death from drowning or crushing injury between the two vessels," reads a government commendation letter given to Bryan Lovejoy, a nurse practitioner on that mission.

All aboard


In the six weeks since the

Grand Princess

medical evacuation, cruise ship quarantine procedures have changed as COVID-19 has become endemic in U.S. communities and as various states and localities have enacted social distancing measures.

Under CDC oversight, cruise lines are responsible for getting passengers safely into home quarantine through charter flights and buses.
Symptomatic and asymptomatic passengers are separated, while the Coast Guard and ambulances handle those needing medical evacuation.
With a vaccine not expected until next year, it remains unclear when cruises will be safe.
On April 15, the CDC’s no-sail order was extended for 100 days or until the agency rescinds it.
"With this pandemic, it’s really not advised to go on a cruise," says the CDC’s Friedman.

Princess Cruises, Holland America, and Carnival Cruises have canceled all their bookings through the middle of the summer, though reservations are reportedly up for 2021.
In a statement, Cruise Lines International Association said that "cruising is neither the source or cause of the virus or its spread" and that "it would be a false assumption to connect higher frequency and visibility in reporting to a higher frequency of infection."

(

Related: What to do if your vacation has been canceled.

)

Carolyn Wright, a Santa Fe, New Mexico-based photographer who was quarantined on the

Grand Princess

in Oakland in March, says that she and a friend have a reservation for a cruise in Germany this fall.

"I’m certainly not looking forward to the Viking Cruise like I was," she says.
"I don’t know if it’s going to happen."

Brendan Borrell lives in Los Angeles and writes about wild places and wild people.
Follow him on Twitter.



####
document number 11: 
DR Congo medics arrested over death of Ebola doctor



Colleagues say Dr Richard Mouzoko was passionate and committed


Three Congolese doctors have been arrested in the Democratic Republic of Congo over the killing of a World Health Organization (WHO) medic, a military prosecutor has said.

Cameroonian doctor Richard Mouzoko was shot dead in April at a hospital in Butembo, where he was treating Ebola patients.

The "passionate" medic was "always ready to go where people would need his help most," the WHO said in a tribute.

The motive for the attack is unclear.

More than 1,800 people have died from the Ebola virus in the past year.
Efforts to contain the spread have been hindered by militia group violence and by suspicion towards foreign medical assistance.

Senior military prosecutor Lt Col Jean-Baptiste Kumbu told AFP that militiamen involved in attacking treatment centres, including Butembo hospital, had under interrogation implicated four doctors in planning the raids.

He said the three Congolese doctors will be prosecuted for "terrorism" and "criminal conspiracy", according to AFP, while the fourth doctor was still at large.


Get the latest on this and other stories on BBC Africa Live


The impact of militant attacks in DR Congo


Ebola disbelief widespread in Congo hotspots


Ebola outbreak in five graphics



The current outbreak in eastern DR Congo began in August last year and is the biggest of the 10 to hit the country since 1976, when the virus was first discovered.

It is dwarfed by the West African epidemic of 2014-16, which affected 28,616 people mainly in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
About 11,310 people died in what was the largest outbreak of the virus ever recorded.


Media captionFear and myths: Why people are still in denial about Ebola


Dr Mouzoko was one of a number of medics deployed by the WHO to help fight the spread of the virus in DR Congo.

Former colleagues in Madagascar, Cameroon and DR Congo have described Dr Mouzoko as a committed professional, who over the course of his career, helped train hundreds of young doctors and health workers.

"He would regularly spend 15 to 20 days a month working among isolated communities in his home country, Cameroon, far from his wife and 4 children," the WHO said in a statement after Dr Mouzoko's death.

His funeral in April was attended by the global health body's top official and its Africa director.

Report



In a letter to the mayor of Butembo, a group representing local doctors said it was "indignant" over the arrests, adding that their absence would cripple vital medical services in the area such as blood transfusions and disease prevention.

The group has threatened to strike within 48 hours unless the three detained doctors are released.

But the military prosecutor dismissed their demands as "out of the question", AFP reports.

Why are Ebola workers being attacked?


About 200 health facilities have been attacked in DR Congo this year, forcing health workers to suspend or delay vaccinations and treatments.

Reuters quotes Lt Col Kumbu as saying a total of 54 people are currently under arrest in connection with attacks on Ebola treatment centres.

In February, medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) put its activities on hold in Butembo and Katwa - two eastern cities in the outbreak's epicentre.

In North Kivu, community-based militia groups called Mai-Mai have been behind some of the attacks against health centres and workers.

Another militia group, the Allied Defence Forces (Ugandan rebels operating within DR Congo) have also been accused of causing widespread disruption to medical units.

There have also been a series of attacks by other unidentified groups on Ebola response centres.


Media captionSome simple techniques can help prevent spread of Ebola.


In one incident, family members assaulted health workers who were overseeing the burial of their relative in May.

A 2018 study published in the Lancet medical journal says "belief in misinformation was widespread" concerning the Ebola outbreak in North Kivu.

One in four respondents believed in the statement that Ebola does not exist, with an even higher proportion saying the Ebola outbreak was fabricated for financial gain, or to destabilise the region.

"There's already been civil unrest in the region and that's exacerbated when a foreign response comes into an area that's heavily guarded," says Lara Salahi, an author who has written about responses to Ebola outbreaks.



####
document number 12: 
Experts: Spy used AI-generated face to connect with targets



LONDON (AP) — Katie Jones sure seemed plugged into Washington’s political scene.
The 30-something redhead boasted a job at a top think tank and a who’s-who network of pundits and experts, from the centrist Brookings Institution to the right-wing Heritage Foundation.
She was connected to a deputy assistant secretary of state, a senior aide to a senator and the economist Paul Winfree, who is being considered for a seat on the Federal Reserve.

But Katie Jones doesn’t exist, The Associated Press has determined.
Instead, the persona was part of a vast army of phantom profiles lurking on the professional networking site LinkedIn.
And several experts contacted by the AP said Jones’ profile picture appeared to have been created by a computer program.

"I’m convinced that it’s a fake face," said Mario Klingemann, a German artist who has been experimenting for years with artificially generated portraits and says he has reviewed tens of thousands of such images.
"It has all the hallmarks."


Why experts think this is a fake photo.
(AP Photo)

Experts who reviewed the Jones profile’s LinkedIn activity say it’s typical of espionage efforts on the professional networking site, whose role as a global Rolodex has made it a powerful magnet for spies.

"It smells a lot like some sort of state-run operation," said Jonas Parello-Plesner, who serves as program director at the Denmark-based think tank Alliance of Democracies Foundation and was the target several years ago of an espionage operation that began over LinkedIn .

William Evanina, director of the U.S. National Counterintelligence and Security Center, said foreign spies routinely use fake social media profiles to home in on American targets — and accused China in particular of waging "mass scale" spying on LinkedIn.

"Instead of dispatching spies to some parking garage in the U.S to recruit a target, it’s more efficient to sit behind a computer in Shanghai and send out friend requests to 30,000 targets," he said in a written statement.

Last month, retired CIA officer Kevin Mallory was sentenced to 20 years in prison for passing details of top secret operations to Beijing, a relationship that began when a Chinese agent posing as a recruiter contacted him on LinkedIn.

Unlike Facebook’s friends-and-family focus, LinkedIn is oriented toward job seekers and headhunters, people who routinely fire out resumes, build vast webs of contacts and pitch projects to strangers.
That connect-them-all approach helps fill the millions of job openings advertised on the site, but it also provides a rich hunting ground for spies.
And that has Western intelligence agencies worried.

British , French and German officials have all issued warnings over the past few years detailing how thousands of people had been contacted by foreign spies over LinkedIn.

In a statement, LinkedIn said it routinely took action against fake accounts, yanking thousands of them in the first three months of 2019.
It also said "we recommend you connect with people you know and trust, not just anyone."

The Katie Jones profile was modest in scale, with 52 connections.
But those connections had enough influence that they imbued the profile with credibility to some who accepted Jones’ invites.
The AP spoke to about 40 other people who connected with Jones between early March and early April of this year, many of whom said they routinely accept invitations from people they don’t recognize.

"I’m probably the worst LinkedIn user in the history of LinkedIn," said Winfree, the former deputy director of President Donald Trump’s domestic policy council, who confirmed connection with Jones on March 28.

Winfree, whose name came up last month in relation to one of the vacancies on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, said he rarely logs on to LinkedIn and tends to just approve all the piled-up invites when he does.

"I literally accept every friend request that I get," he said.

Lionel Fatton, who teaches East Asian affairs at Webster University in Geneva, said the fact that he didn’t know Jones did prompt a brief pause when he connected with her back in March.

"I remember hesitating," he said.
"And then I thought, ‘What’s the harm?’"

Parello-Plesner noted that the potential harm can be subtle: Connecting to a profile like Jones’ invites whoever is behind it to strike up a one-on-one conversation, and other users on the site can view the connection as a kind of endorsement.

"You lower your guard and you get others to lower their guard," he said.

The Jones profile was first flagged by Keir Giles, a Russia specialist with London’s Chatham House think tank.
Giles was recently caught up in an entirely separate espionage operation targeting critics of the Russian antivirus firm Kaspersky Lab.
So when he received an invitation from Katie Jones on LinkedIn he was suspicious.

She claimed to have been working for years as a "Russia and Eurasia fellow" at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, but Giles said that, if that were true, "I ought to have heard of her."

CSIS spokesman Andrew Schwartz told the AP that "no one named Katie Jones works for us."

Jones also claimed to have earned degrees in Russian studies from the University of Michigan, but the school said it was "unable to find anyone by this name earning these degrees from the university."

The Jones account vanished from LinkedIn shortly after the AP contacted the network seeking comment.
Messages sent to Jones herself, via LinkedIn and an associated AOL email account, went unreturned.

Numerous experts interviewed by AP said perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the Katie Jones persona was her face, which they say appears to be artificially created.

Klingemann and other experts said the photo — a closely cropped portrait of a woman with blue-green eyes, copper-colored hair and an enigmatic smile — appeared to have been created using a family of dueling computer programs called generative adversarial networks, or GANs, that can create realistic-looking faces of entirely imaginary people.
GANs, sometimes described as a form of artificial intelligence, have been the cause of increasing concern for policymakers already struggling to get a handle on digital disinformation.
On Thursday, U.S. lawmakers held their first hearing devoted primarily to the threat of artificially generated imagery.

Hao Li, who directs the Vision of Graphics Lab at the University of Southern California’s Institute for Creative Technologies, reeled off a list of digital tells that he believes show the Jones photo was created by a computer program, including inconsistencies around Jones’ eyes, the ethereal glow around her hair and smudge marks on her left cheek.

"This is a typical GAN," he said.
"I’ll bet money on it."

__

Online:

Test your ability to tell a real face from a fake one at: http://www.whichfaceisreal.com/

Generate your own deepfake faces at: https://thispersondoesnotexist.com

___

Raphael Satter can be reached at: https://raphaelsatter.com



####
document number 13: 
Ebola virus and U.S. preparedness: Research on quarantines, treatments, transmission



The first U.S. case of Ebola was reported on September 25, 2014, when a man who had earlier traveled to Liberia sought help in a Dallas hospital.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formally confirmed the diagnosis three days later.
That patient, Thomas Eric Duncan, eventually died, and two health workers who had contact with him contracted the virus.
While Ebola is contagious only when those affected are experiencing active symptoms, Duncan was sent home after an initial visit to the hospital.
Further, a New York City doctor who recently returned from West Africa has also been infected.

The current outbreak of Ebola in West Africa is the deadliest in the history of the disease, with thousands of infections and deaths in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The two latter countries could see 1.4 million cases by January 2015, according to CDC estimates.
The disease was first identified in 1976, appearing simultaneously in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Until now the number of cases has been fairly limited, but the fatality rates are high — anywhere from 25% to 90%; the average is 50% — depending on the strain of virus and the care received.

The World Health Organization has concluded that both Nigeria and Senegal appear to have stopped the spread of the disease, ending its transmission in those countries.
Many top U.S. health experts say that, despite widespread fear, there remains a very low chance of an epidemic in America.
Based on National Safety Council data, the

Washington Post

calculated that the lifetime odds of dying of Ebola in the United States are 1 in 3,934,300 — compared to 1 in 491 for a car crash, 1 in 79 for the flu and 1 in 7 for heart disease.

Quarantines and legal authority

Following policy decisions by New Jersey and New York, there remain deep questions about the efficacy of quarantines in the United States, and related legal and ethical considerations.
The Congressional Research Service has published a brief on legal issues relating to screening and detaining incoming international travelers at airports, and domestic issues of quarantines.
An October 2014 paper from Mark A. Rothstein at the University of Louisville, "From SARS to Ebola: Legal and Ethical Considerations for Modern Quarantine," provides a survey of legal and ethical questions that remain unresolved:

The federal government has the constitutional authority under the Commerce Clause to impose quarantine to prevent the international and interstate spread of infection, and this responsibility has been delegated to the CDC.
Nevertheless, the states maintain primary responsibility for public health, including quarantine.
Many of the state quarantine laws date to the early twentieth century.
The anthrax attack in 2001 provided the impetus for updating these laws to modernize and streamline state public health emergency response.
Although all of the states have updated their laws, at least to some extent, these efforts must be considered works in progress.
Some of the model laws used as templates for modernization have been criticized for failing to include adequate protections for civil liberties and due process.
Virtually all of the laws lack key ancillary measures needed for successful quarantine, such as prohibiting employment discrimination against individuals in quarantine and providing for temporary income replacement so that individuals will not be tempted to violate the quarantine and go to work.

Past surveys of state legal policies also show variations in the scope of available powers.
For more, see the following academic papers from legal scholars: "Pandemic Influenza: Ethics, Law, and the Public’s Health"; and "Public Health Versus Personal Liberty: The Uneasy Case for Individual Detention, Isolation and Quarantine."

Treatments, therapies and new drugs

As a 2014 article in the

Journal of the American Medical Association

(JAMA) points out, Ebola has been around for many years now, but little progress has been made in terms of treatment: "Since 1976 more than 15 Ebola outbreaks have erupted in sub Saharan Africa, yet therapeutic options remain undeveloped.
There are no licensed vaccines or specific antiviral or immune-mediated treatments for ill patients or for post-exposure prophylaxis."
An experimental drug, ZMapp, is under development, but large-scale medical trials and anything resembling wide-scale availability are far in the future — if it’s effective, which is an open question at this point.
Logistical problems and a lack of funding have hampered efforts to deploy experimental drugs and vaccines, as the journal

Nature

notes.

The Broad Institute, jointly run by Harvard and MIT, has reported some progress in getting a fuller understanding of the genomics of the disease and its mutations, as reported in the journal

Science

.

While there is an urgent need to rapidly accelerate the testing of new treatments, doing so has potential downsides as well.
As the University of Pennsylvania’s Dr.
Steven Joffe writes, "efforts to evaluate novel agents risk diverting attention and human and material assets from proven therapeutic and public health measures.
Well-motivated initiatives directed at promising new therapies must not jeopardize existing health infrastructures."

In an October 2014 article published

The New England Journal of Medicine

, leading researchers note:

Even if adequate safety and immunogenicity are demonstrated in the phase 1 studies, vaccines will not be available in substantial quantity until the first quarter of 2015 at the earliest.
For that to occur, funding must be secured for production.
Even if an effective vaccine can be produced, it is not likely to be 100% effective, so to succeed in stemming the current outbreak, a coordinated effort to improve capacity and provide clinical care in affected countries needs to be scaled up urgently.

An October 2014 letter published in

The Lancet

suggests that one promising research avenue is to investigate those who appear to have an immunity to Ebola, as "many Ebola infections are asymptomatic."
The article notes that "although asymptomatic infections are unlikely to be infectious, they might confer protective immunity and thus have important epidemiological consequences."

Finally, the lack of an effective drug to treat Ebola has also become a political issue.
"NIH has been working on Ebola vaccines since 2001.
It’s not like we suddenly woke up and thought, ‘Oh my gosh, we should have something ready here,'" Dr.
Francis Collins, the head of the National Institutes of Health, has said.
"Frankly, if we had not gone through our 10-year slide in research support, we probably would have had a vaccine in time for this that would’ve gone through clinical trials and would have been ready."

Potential for a large-scale outbreak

While Ebola virus is extremely dangerous, its transmission rate is lower than that of many other diseases.
"As long as people are under proper care and appropriate precautions are taken, there’s no reason to think we can’t control the transmission of the virus," Harvard’s Michael VanRooyen has said.
"So in that sense, it’s not like SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome] or MERS [Middle East respiratory syndrome], for example, where we would worry about an epidemic spreading in the United States."

In terms of the global spread of the disease, an October 2014 study published in

The Lancet

notes: "Based on epidemic conditions and international flight restrictions to and from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone as of Sept 1, 2014 (reductions in passenger seats by 51% for Liberia, 66% for Guinea, and 85% for Sierra Leone), our model projects 2·8 travellers infected with Ebola virus departing the above three countries via commercial flights, on average, every month."

Contagiousness is measured by the average number of people whom a sick person will infect.
This is strongly influenced by the specifics of each illness — when a person becomes infectious themselves after catching the disease, and how the disease can be transmitted.
The transmission rate is called the disease reproduction factor and is referred to as "R0" or "R nought."

One of the most infectious diseases is measles: In an unvaccinated population, a sick person will infect 18 others on average.
(Because the vast majority of the U.S. population is vaccinated against measles, in practice its reproduction rate is effectively zero.)
By comparison, the reproduction rate for mumps is 10, and that for SARS is 4.
HIV is also 4, while Hepatitis C’s rate is approximately 2.

A September 2014 study in

PLoS Current Outbreaks

, "Assessing the International Spreading Risk Associated with the 2014 West African Ebola Outbreak," indicates that the reproduction rate for Ebola is between 1.5 and 2.
Two factors are at play: First, sick people become infectious themselves only when they begin to show symptoms.
Second, direct contact is required for the disease to be transmitted.
Still, because there is no vaccine against Ebola, extreme caution is warranted, and missteps by the Dallas Hospital have increased the chance that others may have been infected.

The study also models the international spreading of the outbreak — the case in Dallas was the first outside Africa — and estimates the probability of Ebola virus appearing in countries around the world.
The results indicate that in the short term, the probability of international spread is "small but not negligible," and could increase if the disease continues to advance in Africa.
Countries outside Africa with the highest probability of outbreaks include the United Kingdom, Belgium and France, in part because of significant air-traffic flows.

Science and the airborne transmission hypothesis

One of the most controversial issues implicated in the current outbreak is the issue of whether Ebola can be transmitted through the air.
Scientists do not believe it can, based on the most recent lab experiments.
The CDC summarizes the findings of several studies as follows: "Airborne transmission of Ebola virus has been hypothesized but not demonstrated in humans.
While Ebola virus can be spread through airborne particles under experimental conditions in animals, this type of spread has not been documented during human EVD outbreaks in settings such as hospitals or households."

In terms of citations for this claim, a 2014

Nature

study performed a careful test involving primates in a lab setting and did not find evidence of airborne transmission.
That is the best and most recent evidence.
The CDC does note two 1995 studies and a 2011 study that drew different, though not necessarily contradictory, conclusions.
An October 2014 letter in

The Lancet

presents what is known about the need for respiratory protection.

U.S. preparedness and concerns

The United States has been planning and practicing for pandemics since the 1970s, and experts note that the "pillars" of this public health work remain basically the same: surveillance; vaccination and medical countermeasures; emergency response coordination; and communications.

For U.S. facilities to prepare for Ebola, there will need to be a variety of unique systems and protocols put into place, health experts note.
A 2014 article in the

Annals of Internal Medicine

spells out four crucial steps: "First, staff education is vital to ‘demystifying’ Ebola and reducing anxiety; second, posters clarifying PPE [personal protective equipment] donning and doffing procedures facilitate staff understanding and compliance; and third, an ongoing, coordinated multidisciplinary effort is required to establish standard operating procedures and staff must be trained to follow them; and finally, direct observation of clinical care enforces adherence to these procedures."
However, all new systems, equipment and public health protocols carry with them the possibility of introducing new risks.
Top experts on health procedures and systems say that an Ebola epidemic is preventable in the United States if strict protocols are followed.

In recent years, the CDC has warned about gaps in epidemiology capacity in state health departments; other academic survey-based research has also furnished warnings about decreased capacity.
Recent crises have seen relatively successful outcomes, but they have been by no means without cost, as noted in a 2013 study in the journal

Emerging Infectious Diseases

:

Although the 2009 A(H1N1)pdm09 pandemic spread globally within a matter of weeks, a 1918-like pandemic did not materialize.
Nonetheless, this most recent pandemic resulted in [approximately] 12,500 deaths in the United States, [approximately] 90% of which occurred in persons [younger than] 65 years of age.
In the wake of this pandemic, the challenge in preparedness is to sustain the interest of private and public sectors in planning for a large-scale outbreak that may have a much more severe effect at a time that cannot be predicted.

A 2014 paper in the

New England Journal of Medicine

, "Pandemic Preparedness and Response: Lessons from the H1N1 Influenza of 2009," offers deep analysis on what research and experience have revealed, and how that might influence future disease outbreaks.
The author, Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg of the Institute of Medicine, notes recent "operational missteps" by the World Health Organization, and "in light of these structural impediments and operational deficiencies, the world was very fortunate that the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic was not more severe."

Further resources: Also see the Congressional Research Service report "Ebola: Basics about the Disease."
Other vital sources of research-based information on the virus are

The Lancet

’s Ebola Research Centre, the Ebola Communication Network (USAID and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health) and the World Health Organization.

Keywords: infectious diseases, pandemics, disease outbreaks, Ebola, influenza, quarantines



####
document number 14: 
A Timeline of Outbreaks from 2000 to Present


Illustration by Joelena Despard


All information is reported under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization.

1999-2002 – West Nile Virus

The first account of the West Nile Virus in the U.S. was in New York City in the summer of 1999.
The virus was transmitted by mosquito bites, concentrating in areas with warmer temperatures\; as the number of human cases grew, so did the number of bird deaths.
During a three-year period, WNV spread to 44 states, amounting to 4,156 cases and 284 deaths.
Typical symptoms include breaking out in high fever, a stiff neck and headaches, though most people who are infected do not show any symptoms unless the infection is serious.

2001 – Anthrax

After 9/11, letters contaminated with white powder containing anthrax spores were delivered to a news media company and two U.S. Senators’ offices.
The powder let the anthrax spores float in the air to be breathed in.
The first diagnosed case came in October of 2001, and climbed to a total of 22 cases and five deaths.
The FBI led a nine-year investigation on how anthrax got in those letters, and concluded the powder came from a research lab.

2003 – SARS-CoV

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, a viral respiratory illness caused by a coronavirus, was first diagnosed in Asia in February of 2003, later reaching the U.S. in that same year.
Common symptoms included high fevers, coughing and shortness of breath.
A total of 8,098 people worldwide became sick, with only eight of those cases being in the U.S., and 774 people died.

2006 – Mumps

The U.S. saw multi-state outbreaks of mumps reporting more than 6,500 cases in 2006, concentrating mainly in Midwestern college campuses.
Mumps spread through close-contact activities such as sports, dancing, kissing, etc.
From 2009 to 2010, the largest outbreak reported 3,000 cases in a close-knit religious community in New York City after an infected student returned from the UK where there was another outbreak.
Notable symptoms include fever, puffy cheeks and a swollen, tender jaw.

2006 – E. coli Salmonella

Escherichia coli was first reported in the U.S. in 2006 through the contamination of fresh spinach, with 199 reported cases and three deaths within 26 states.
The following year, Taco Bell was linked to E. coli cases in the northeastern area of the U.S.
The contraction of E. coli can lead to the development of Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome and potentially kidney failure, while other notable symptoms are severe diarrhea and respiratory illnesses.
In 2008, 49 cases in multiple states were linked to consuming Kroger Beef and in 2009 raw cookie dough was the culprit.
However, the most infamous outbreak occurred in 2015 where a total of 58 cases were reported in 14 states.

In 2006, tomatoes were linked to Salmonella for a total of 183 cases in 21 states.
The list of foods linked to salmonella ranged from cantaloupe, peanut butter, raw chicken to even pet food.
In 2012, cases of Salmonella linked to small turtles led to a total of 473 cases in 43 states but no deaths reported.
The most recent outbreaks have been reported from consumption of a specific brand of tahini in 2018.
Common symptoms include diarrhea, fever and abdominal cramps.

2009 – H1N1 Virus (Swine Flu)

In April of 2009, 20 cases of swine flu were reported in the U.S., eventually becoming a pandemic flu reaching 208 countries by December and resulting in at least 12,220 deaths.
The swine flu was transmitted by pigs as a respiratory disease, usually through contact with farm raisers or participation in fairs.

2012 – Whooping Cough

Also known as pertussis, this respiratory disease surmounted to 48,277 cases in the U.S. in 2012.
Coughing fits last up to 10 weeks or more and can be life-threatening for infants.
Worldwide, the estimation of whooping cough cases is 24.1 million with about 160,700 deaths per year according to the National Center for Biotechnology Information.

2012 – MERS-CoV

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome was first found in the Arabian Peninsula in 2012 and was also associated with the coronavirus once the illness became viral.
Only two cases were found in the U.S. in 2014, one in Indiana and another in Florida, linked to health care providers who previously worked in Saudi Arabia.
Up until 2019, 2,494 cases have been reported, including 858 deaths.

2014 – Ebola

Ebola was found in Africa near the Ebola River in 1976, but the outbreak that recently caught the world’s attention started in Guinea before spreading to neighboring countries, with the highest cases in Sierra Leone of 14,124 and 3,956 deaths.
Ebola reached the U.S. but only recorded four cases and one fatality, and in 2015 the CDC announced a vaccine against the disease.
The most recent outbreaks of Ebola occured in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2018.

2016 – Zika Virus

The most at threat potential victims for this mosquito-transmitted disease are pregnant women, whom if bitten, their pregnancy could result in stillbirth, preterm birth or fetal loss.
In November of 2016, 84 countries were reported to have Zika virus cases in the Americas, with the first cases reported in Brazil, then spreading in high numbers to New York, Florida and Texas.

2020 – Coronavirus

On Jan.
30, the World Health Organization declared a "public health emergency of international concern" for the new coronavirus, COVID-19, originating from Wuhan, Hubei Province in China.
Like SARS and MERS, this virus originates from certain animals before infecting humans, and has spread quickly.
The confirmed locations of the virus’ presence are in Asia, the U.S., Canada, Australia, Europe and Russia.



####
document number 15: 
Pinellas nursing home evacuated after outbreak; 3 dead from coronavirus



SEMINOLE — Three nursing home residents have died of the coronavirus in an outbreak that has afflicted Freedom Square of Seminole, a sprawling retirement community that has seen dozens hospitalized because of the virus, officials said.

A 74-year-old man died April 10.
Then an 84-year-old woman and a 66-year-old man both died Friday, according to medical examiner records.

Hours after Friday’s deaths, ambulances started lining up outside the Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation nursing home.

State, local and company officials agreed to shut down the facility and evacuate the 39 remaining residents to local hospitals, according to the Pinellas County administrator’s office.

What happened in this nursing home reveals how quickly COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, can spread in a facility filled with those most vulnerable to it.
In a span of eight days, from the first confirmed diagnoses to Friday’s mass evacuation, a total of 95 residents were removed from the facility and three have now died.

But the outbreak didn’t become public until Wednesday, after the first death and first wave of evacuations.
The pandemic has hit senior care centers across the country particularly hard.
But in Florida, Gov.
Ron DeSantis has refused to disclose which of those facilities have confirmed cases of COVID-19.

"We extend our sincere condolences to the families and patients ... and our thoughts and prayers are with them at this difficult time," Freedom Square Executive director Michael Mason said in a statement sent Friday to the

Tampa Bay Times. "

Over this past week Freedom Square began an orderly and voluntary transfer of Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation patients who were asymptomatic but potentially exposed, symptomatic, or who had confirmed cases of COVID-19 to three local hospitals for treatment and monitoring."

Inside the nursing home, nurses told the

Times

they didn’t know how quickly the virus had spread inside the facility — but they knew the company wasn’t ready for it.

• • •

Freedom Square of Seminole is a retirement community of more than 700 residents at 7800 Liberty Lane.
The Seminole Pavilion Rehabilitation nursing home is one of several buildings on its campus.

A nurse who has worked in all of the buildings there said the company has not been forthcoming in sharing information with employees, patients and their relatives.

Employees did not know about the gravity of the outbreak until the media reported the transfer of patients late Wednesday, said the nurse, who requested anonymity out of fear of job loss.

"They kept information from the patients and families," the nurse said.
"They have not told us anything about this until it blew up."

Freedom Square, the nurse said, has lacked masks and gowns for weeks and many nurses and certified nursing assistants have resorted to buying their own equipment — if they can find it.
Some employees are also wearing homemade or cloth masks because the company is not supplying N95 masks, the nurse said.

"You have to go to Walgreens," the nurse said.

As the outbreak has grown, the nurse said employees fear for their safety because protocols are not in place to minimize the virus spread such as disinfecting many common areas.

Then on Thursday, the company told employees they need to get tested for the virus.
Many have concerns about the spread because employees enter different parts of the buildings on the campus, the nurse said.

"People don’t feel safe," the worker said.
"Nurses are quitting."

Patient care has deteriorated as employees quit and supplies shrink, the worker said.

This account was relayed to Freedom Square’s parent company, Life Care Services of Iowa, which operates more than 130 properties, according to the website.

The company did not address the allegations in a statement to the

Times

.

• • •

The first confirmed case of a resident was a man hospitalized on April 5, according to the medical examiner.
He tested positive on April 9 for COVID-19.
He died on April 10.

Then on Tuesday, Freedom Square officials said they transferred 38 nursing home patients to three local hospitals.
Some were confirmed to have COVID-19, officials said, while others had symptoms or had come into contact with patients who displayed symptoms.

The outbreak didn’t become public until county officials revealed it Wednesday.
Freedom Square confirmed the hospitalizations on Thursday.
And information about the three deaths was not known until Friday, a week after the first death, when the

Times

obtained the medical examiner’s reports.

Freedom Square said on Thursday that 21 residents and six staffers had tested positive.
Mason sent a note to residents, their families and employees announcing that "in an abundance of caution," COVID-19 patients would be given "non-emergency transport" to local hospitals.

"This is not only good news for these residents, but it is also good news for the entire Freedom Square campus," he wrote in a letter obtained by the

Times

.

Pinellas County Commissioner Pat Gerard said she was told the facility was reluctant to transfer the patients to hospitals, but did so when they became overwhelmed by the outbreak.
In its statement, the retirement community said it transferred the patients to stop the spread of the virus and to focus on the remaining patients still living in the building.

Then came Friday’s evacuation.

"This will allow the facility and (Department of Health) to completely reset the facility’s infection control practices, decontaminate the site, provide additional training for staff, etc.," said a message the county administrator’s office sent to the Pinellas County Commission.

"On the advice of our partners, and out of an abundance of caution, at noon on Friday ... Freedom Square made the decision to transfer all remaining patients from Seminole Pavilion to local hospitals," Mason said in a statement to the

Times

.
"The families of all impacted residents have been contacted to let them know of the change in their loved one’s situation."

That afternoon, four ambulances started pulling up to the nursing home, each one taking a resident to a local hospital.
The ambulances returned to pick up more patients, and on it went through the evening.

A total of 95 patients have been transferred out of the nursing home, Mason said, and all were tested for the virus.
There have been 36 confirmed cases and six patients are awaiting the results of their tests.
There were 53 residents who tested negative.

The residents who tested positive, or showed symptoms, were taken to local hospitals.

But Mason’s statement did not address how many staffers were tested, and how many of those tests came back positive.

• • •

The first resident to die was Thomas Minichillo.
He was 74.

He arrived at Largo Medical Center on April 5 for a "mental status change," according to the medical examiner’s report.

At the time, he did not have flu-like symptoms.
Two days later, he was hypoxic — deprived of oxygen — and was intubated.
Doctors ordered a COVID-19 test.
On April 9, he tested positive.
He died, still intubated, at 2:27 p.m. on April 10.

Jean Israelson, 84, died Friday after a week of experiencing symptoms, according to a medical examiner’s report.

She was tested for COVID-19 on April 11.
She was experiencing shortness of breath and was transported to Largo Medical Center on Tuesday.
A laboratory confirmed Israelson had contracted COVID-19 before she died.

Daniel Lewis, 66, died Friday morning, a few hours after Israelson, according to a medical examiner’s report.

Lewis was taken Sunday from the nursing home to St.
Anthony’s Hospital, where medical staff confirmed he had COVID-19.
He was transferred to the Suncoast Hospice North Pinellas Care Center Wednesday.
He was pronounced dead at 9:30 a.m. Friday.

Lewis was admitted to the hospital in mid-February with chest pain, difficulty breathing and a history of serious lung disease, but records indicate that as many as eight weeks passed before he was tested for COVID-19.

His daughter, Melissa, told the medical investigator that her father lived in his own home until mid-February, when he was admitted to St.
Anthony’s, according to the report.
Daniel Lewis, a heavy smoker with a history of severe lung disease, was suffering from chest pain and difficulty breathing.

He was diagnosed with a mycobacterium infection, treated, and transferred to Carrington Place.
But he was admitted back to St.
Anthony’s 12 hours later with worsening symptoms.
Lewis was moved to Freedom Square for rehab on March 26.

He was tested at the nursing home for COVID-19 on April 10.
Two days later, his results came back positive.
He died five days after the positive test.

• • •

Family members, attorneys and advocates have sounded alarms about the delays in residents and the public being informed about the outbreak.

April Hill, an elder law attorney with Hill Law Group in St.
Petersburg, said one of her clients hadn’t heard anything until reports of the coronavirus outbreak hit the news.
When the news became public, they got a generic phone call saying there were a few positive cases.

The client’s family member is in independent living at Freedom Square, which is housed in a separate building from the rehab center, Hill said.

She said her client felt like they were being left in the dark.

"They’re not feeling like Freedom Square is being open or honest with them," Hill said.

Beth Woods of Chicago said her family is worried about her father, a Freedom Square resident who tested positive for COVID-19 and was transferred to a local hospital.

The family, Woods said, has not been able to get much information from Freedom Square.

She said they got several calls from staff on Thursday but "an employee couldn’t give me any specific information about my father or when he was tested or what he knew about his condition."

"We still haven’t spoken with my father," Woods said, "and not a single word from Freedom Square today."

She praised the care and communication from the staff at Morton Plant Hospital.
Woods said her family is learning more from the media than Freedom Square.

"Whatever they’re doing there is a complete cover up," Woods told the

Times

about Freedom Square.
"What’s happening now is not humane."

HAVE YOU LOST SOMEONE YOU LOVE TO COVID-19?
: Help us remember them

CONTRIBUTE TO THE SCRAPBOOK: Help us tell the story of life under coronavirus

BRIGHT SPOTS IN DARK TIMES: The world is hard right now, but there’s still good news out there

LISTEN TO THE CORONAVIRUS PODCAST: New episodes every week, including interviews with experts and reporters

GET THE DAYSTARTER MORNING UPDATE: Sign up to receive the most up-to-date information, six days a week

We’re working hard to bring you the latest news on the coronavirus in Florida.
This effort takes a lot of resources to gather and update.
If you haven’t already subscribed,


please consider buying a print or digital subscription.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = treatment vaccine development
document number 1: 
China shares with world new progress in COVID-19 treatment


China has reported new progress in the research of COVID-19 drugs and therapies, sharing with the world its clinical experience and achievements and pushing forward international cooperation in the study of the disease.


China has reported new progress in the research of COVID-19 drugs and therapies, sharing with the world its clinical experience and achievements and pushing forward international cooperation in the study of the disease.


A staff member tests samples of the COVID-19 inactivated vaccine at a vaccine production plant of China National Pharmaceutical Group (Sinopharm) in Beijing, capital of China, April 11, 2020.
[Photo/Xinhua]

One of the highlights of the new progress is stem cell treatment, which has been used in more than 200 cases in Wuhan, the hardest-hit city amid the epidemic in China, Sun Yanrong, deputy head of the China National Center for Biotechnology Development under the Ministry of Science and Technology, said at a press conference on Tuesday.

Clinical trials show that the therapy is safe, and can increase the cure rate of severe patients by inhibiting lung inflammation and improve the respiratory function of patients in the rehabilitation period, according to Sun.

China has also made progress in convalescent plasma therapy.
So far, more than 700 patients have received such treatment with good effects.
The median length of stay in ICU of the patients receiving convalescent plasma therapy was significantly shorter than that in the control group, Sun said.

Since the outbreak of COVID-19, China has launched 27 projects in the research of drugs, therapies and related technologies.
More than 3,200 researchers from 152 hospitals, universities and institutions across China, including those on the front line of the fight against COVID-19 in Wuhan, have participated in the research.

At present, clinical trials on four drugs are in progress, and more than 10 research achievements have been included in the diagnosis and treatment guidelines on COVID-19, Sun said.

Currently, the main drugs used in treating COVID-19 cases in China include Chloroquine Phosphate, Favipiravir and traditional Chinese medicines.

Several Chinese research teams are focusing on the utilization of monoclonal antibodies, and have achieved some progress, Sun said.

In addition, Chinese researchers have developed human immunoglobulin from the COVID-19 convalescent plasma, which could be used in the clinical treatment of patients, as well as the passive immune protection of high-risk groups.

China is also promoting research on independently developed drugs, and accelerating the clinical research on a series of drugs including traditional Chinese medicines, Carrimycin, Tetrandrine and Azvudine, Sun said.

China has shared with the world its experience in epidemic prevention and control at the earliest possible date, with the results of Chinese scientists' clinical research on COVID-19 quickly published in international academic journals.

According to incomplete statistics, Chinese research teams have conducted academic exchanges and discussions with over 140 countries and regions on new research progress and clinical application experience involving traditional Chinese medicines, Chloroquine Phosphate, Favipiravir, Tocilizumab, convalescent plasma therapy and stem cell treatment.

A number of Chinese research achievements have been applied in the clinical treatment of COVID-19 in other countries.

The World Health Organization and some countries are also carrying out clinical research on Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine.
Several drugs and therapies used by China such as convalescent plasma therapy and Tocilizumab have also been approved by many countries in their treatment or clinical research, Sun said.

She said the development of the drugs and therapies requires the wisdom of the whole world.
Chloroquine Phosphate was invented by German scientists 80 years ago, Favipiravir was developed by Japanese scientists 20 years ago, and Carrimycin was created by Chinese scientists 30 years ago.

She said China is actively expanding the channels of international scientific and technological cooperation and promoting joint clinical research on the disease.

MORE FROM China SCIO





####
document number 2: 
Gilead’s remdesivir enters China phase III trial to fight coronavirus


Man wearing mask, receiving coronavirus vaccine


BEIJING – China will kickstart a phase III trial Feb.
3 to determine whether patients with 2019-nCoV can be treated with Gilead Sciences Inc.
’s NUC inhibitor, remdesivir, which was originally developed for Ebola, four days after a U.S. patient was said to have recovered by using the drug candidate.

The study, expected to be completed on April 27, is a phase III randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of remdesivir in hospitalized adult patients with mild and moderate 2019-nCoV infections.
It will enroll 270 patients and be carried out in the China-Japan Friendship Hospital in Beijing.

Gilead said it is expediting the laboratory testing of remdesivir against 2019-nCoV samples and working with the Chinese authorities.

Remdesivir is being developed by the U.S. company as a monophosphoramidate prodrug of code GS-441524 that targets viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.
It was intended to be an intravenous treatment for Ebola, but it also showed potential against coronavirus and Nipah virus infections.

Remdesivir is yet to be approved anywhere globally and has not been demonstrated to be safe or effective for any use.
However, a paper in

The New England Journal of Medicine

published Jan.
31 suggested there was a possibility of using the drug candidate to help contain the deadly 2019-nCoV virus, which has killed 361 people so far.

On Jan 26, a 35-year-old patient in the U.S. with 2019-nCoV received remdesivir, a week after he was admitted to the hospital, according to reports.
The following day, his fever went down from 39.4 degrees Celsius to 37.3 degrees Celsius, oxygen saturation values improved to 94% to 96%, and the previous bilateral lower-lobe rales were no longer present.

Five days after being treated with remdesivir, he was said to be afebrile, with all symptoms resolved except for his cough, which was getting better.

The encouraging result prompted Gilead and the Chinese authorities to move the phase III trial ahead and expand it to a lot more patients who need treatment desperately.

"Remdesivir is not a well-proven drug in either the U.S. or China," He Gongxin, former chief representative of the Shanghai office at Gilead, told

BioWorld

.
"Since 2019-nCoV is a new virus, we’ll just try it.
There are good scientific reasons for us to believe it could be safe and efficacious.

"I believe this is the best chance we have for now," He added.

In October 2015, a phase I study that evaluated the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of remdesivir in healthy volunteers demonstrated promising results and supported further clinical studies.

The drug candidate has been evaluated in preclinical studies for the potential treatment of coronavirus infection.

"Remdesivir has demonstrated in vitro and in vivo activity in animal models against the viral pathogens MERS and SARS, which are coronaviruses that are structurally similar to 2019-nCoV," said Gilead’s chief medical officer Merdad Parsey.

In mice, remdesivir significantly decreased Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS)-coronavirus lung viral loads and improved respiratory function and disease outcomes, whereas lopinavir/ritonavir plus IFN-beta only improved respiratory function, according to the in vivo data presented at the 32nd International Conference on Antiviral Research in Baltimore in May 2019.

The in vitro data presented at the same conference in May 2017 showed that remdesivir was highly active against multiple coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), MERS and murine hepatitis with EC50 in the range of 0.02-0.07 mM, and exhibited selectivity indexes of 135 to 1,600 in human and murine cell lines.

As for now, it remains to be seen if there is antiviral data for remdesivir that show activity against 2019-nCoV.

"The U.S. patient’s conditions improved significantly, but that’s all we have," He told

BioWorld

.
"Once the clinical trial completes in April, the conclusion will be clear."

He added the end of April would likely be the earliest point to tell if remdesivir works, as the clinical trial cannot go any faster.
The treatment itself will take nine days, and the data analysis will also take time.

As of Feb 3., 17,242 people are confirmed to be infected and 361 have died.
The numbers have skyrocketed over the past few weeks.

Due to the enormous pressure to curb the spread of 2019-nCoV, remdesivir could be the first drug used on Chinese patients under the compassionate use program, which was written into China’s Drug Administration Law in August 2019.
The U.S. allowed remdesivir to be used on the 35-year-old patient on a compassionate basis.

Remdesivir had already been used on the same basis on a patient in the U.K. infected with Ebola in October 2015.

Global efforts

Currently, there are more than 40 drugs under development globally to fight the coronavirus infection, and efforts are concentrated on SARS and MERS.
Among the drug candidates, 65% are against MERS and 25% against SARS.

The global pipeline will see two new drug candidates targeting the novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV, which will be developed by Moderna Therapeutics Inc.
as an mRNA vaccine and Inovio Pharmaceutical Inc.
as INO-4800.

Also joining the R efforts are Johnson Johnson, Novavax Inc., Vir Biotechnology Inc., Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Wuxi Biologics Cayman Inc., Stemirna Therapeutics Co.
Ltd., Bravovax Co. and Geovax Labs Inc.
Ltd.

In academia, Hong Kong researchers led by microbiologist Yuen Kwok-yung have made progress in developing a vaccine for 2019-nCoV by modifying an influenza vaccine with a part of the surface antigen of the coronavirus.
The University of Queensland (UQ) in Australia is also aiming to develop one.

HIV drugs also play a part.

Lopinavir/ritonavir, a HIV-1 protease inhibitor marketed by Abbvie in 2000, will be investigated in a clinical trial in China for 2019-nCoV.
Ascletis Pharma Inc.
has also filed with regulators to include its ritonavir and ASC09 fixed-dose combination for emergency use.
The company said Feb.
3 it is in talks with medical researchers to assist them in initiating clinical trials.

No Comments



####
document number 3: 
&amp;lt; Vaccine Makers Hedge Bets On Which One Will Emerge As Effective And Safe


DAVID GREENE, HOST:

The COVID-19 pandemic has shattered the normal way vaccines are produced.
Once upon a time, it was a stepwise process from concept to design to tests in humans then to regulatory approval and then to manufacturing.
It was a process that could take a decade or even more.
But now the hope is all of that can be done in a year or less.
NPR's Joe Palca has this story about one of the ways this remarkable speed up will be achieved.

JOE PALCA, BYLINE: There are more than a hundred COVID-19 vaccines at various stages of development.
One that's pretty far along is made by the biotech company Novavax.
Gregory Glenn is president of research and development at Novavax.

GREGORY GLENN: We have a lot of confidence, based on what we've seen so far in our animal modeling, the vaccine will work.

PALCA: But animal testing is one thing, so typically he'd be waiting to see the results of human testing that's just begun before making any big decisions about manufacturing.
But now a lot of steps that used to come one after another are taking place in parallel.
One of the most dramatic things we're doing in parallel is to assume the vaccine is going to work, and so we scale up now.
And they're aiming to scale up to the hundreds of millions of doses or more that will be needed.

But Novavax is in the vaccine development business.
It doesn't have the ability to manufacture those hundreds of millions of doses, so the company has turned to people like Sean Kirk.

SEAN KIRK: I'm the executive vice president of manufacturing and technical operations for Emergent BioSolutions.

PALCA: Emergent BioSolutions can do commercial manufacturing.
Kirk has agreed to take me on a virtual tour of Emergent's vaccine facility in Baltimore.
He's brought along three of his colleagues for technical and moral support.

JASON JENKINS: Jason Jenkins, senior manager of upstream.

AMANDA ILIOFF: Amanda Ilioff, upstream supervisor.

SCOTT KELLY: Scott Kelly, director of operations.

PALCA: Kirk is standing in a corridor next to a large glass window.
On the other side of the glass is a room where the Novavax vaccine is being made.

KIRK: What you're looking at here is one step of a multiple-step process.

PALCA: Kirk points his cellphone camera into the room.
I can see several stainless steel pieces of equipment about the size of a commercial refrigerator.
The vaccine is actually generated by living cells called a tissue culture that are grown inside a large plastic bag.

KIRK: You can see the bag sticking out the top.
Do you see it?

PALCA: Technicians inside the room are loading the bag into a 50-liter vessel that's part of what's called a bioreactor.

KIRK: Around the outside of this is the vessel itself that provides the heating, the cooling and, with the inserted agitator, the mixing.

PALCA: Kirk explains this is the starting step in the manufacturing process.

KIRK: From here, we grow the culture.
And then we transfer it to a larger bioreactor - 1,000-liter, 2000-liter, 4000-liter - to be able to expand up the volumes and get the yields that we need to successfully produce the doses.

PALCA: All of this has to be done to strict Food and Drug Administration standards.
And the process can be finicky.
So I asked Kirk and his colleagues if they were confident they could make those hundreds of millions of doses, especially on a short timescale.

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON #1: Yes, sir - better believe...

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON #2: Absolutely.

UNIDENTIFIED PERSON #3: We're in it to win it, buddy.
Never fear.

PALCA: That confidence may be because the company they work for was created specifically to deal with public health crises.

BOB KRAMER: Emergent BioSolutions has been around for a little over 20 years.

PALCA: Bob Kramer is president and CEO.
The company specializes in dealing with public health issues and dangerous substances.
It makes vaccines for anthrax, smallpox, typhoid and cholera.

In 2012, the Department of Health and Human Services asked Emergent to build for them a special kind of facility.

KRAMER: Where they could bring new technology into that facility and be able to quickly scale up and manufacture large volumes of vaccines for whatever emerging infectious disease we were presented with.

PALCA: That facility is where the Novavax vaccine is being manufactured.
The company also has agreements to manufacture a vaccine being developed by Vaxart and another by Johnson Johnson.

Just last week, the government announced it was providing Emergent with an additional $628 million to make and package vaccines.
Kramer says they have a robust manufacturing capacity.

KRAMER: We already have the capability to produce hundreds of millions of doses in our existing infrastructure.

PALCA: But all that infrastructure and all the money that's being spent to expand it will be for naught if the vaccines don't work.
It's a gamble health officials say the country has to make.

Joe Palca, NPR News.

Copyright © 2020 NPR.
All rights reserved.
Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR.
This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future.
Accuracy and availability may vary.
The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.



####
document number 4: 
Kaiser Permanente launches first coronavirus vaccine trial


Jennifer Haller, a clinical trial volunteer, receives the first-ever injection of an investigational vaccine for the coronavirus.
Credit: Ted S.
Warren / AP Photos


NIH-funded trial of Moderna mRNA vaccine is first of any for COVID-19

THIS STORY WAS UPDATED FROM PREVIOUS VERSIONS PUBLISHED MARCH 4, MARCH 16, AND MARCH 19, 2020.


On March 16, Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute (KPWHRI) gave the first-ever injection of an investigational vaccine for the 2019 novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, to 4 volunteers participating in a phase 1 federally sponsored clinical trial.

As of March 16, no other trial had been launched in people of any vaccine for this virus, which causes COVID-19.
The trial at KPWHRI’s Seattle-based Vaccine Treatment and Evaluation Unit (VTEU) began recruiting participants on March 3.
"We are proud that the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) selected us to conduct this innovative trial," said Lisa Jackson, MD, MPH, senior investigator at KPWHRI.
"We’re well prepared and focused on helping to address this evolving health situation."
Dr.
Jackson is the lead researcher for the study, funded by the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

"Finding a safe and effective vaccine to prevent infection with SARS-CoV-2 is an urgent public health priority," said NIAID Director Anthony S. Fauci, MD, in a NIAID news release.
"This phase 1 study, launched in record speed, is an important first step toward achieving that goal."

Emory University’s VTEU in Atlanta, Georgia joined the trial on March 27.
NIAID added the second site to ensure that the trial can move forward without dependence on a single geographic location.

The investigational vaccine is called mRNA-1273 and made by Moderna.
The vaccine is made using a new process that is much faster than older methods of making vaccines.
It does not contain any part of the actual coronavirus and cannot cause infection.
Instead, it includes a short segment of messenger RNA that is made in a lab.

The trial will involve 45 healthy adults


Study participants must be healthy adults age 18 to 55 years.
To be eligible, they can’t have certain health conditions that affect the immune system, and they can’t be taking medications that affect the immune system.

The initial trial will involve just 45 participants—28 at KPWHRI and 17 at Emory University.
It is a "phase I" test of a 3-phase process examining the potential vaccine.
In this first phase, researchers are testing the safety of various doses and whether these doses produce an immune response.
Phase I trials don’t study the effectiveness of the vaccine in preventing coronavirus infection.
That work comes at a later phase of the vaccine research.

Response to study recruitment efforts has been very positive, so the study teams no longer need to identify potential study participants.
Online study recruitment is now closed.

KPWHRI’s path to this important role


KPWHRI’s vaccine research team began preparations for the possibility of a trial as soon as they got the call on January 28.
The team has expertise in conducting these kinds of trials, including testing other investigational vaccines against "swine" and "bird" flu.
KPWHRI became a VTEU site in 2007, and it is the only one of the nation’s 9 VTEU centers not housed at a university medical center.
Since 1962, the VTEUs have played a key role in developing new and improved vaccines and therapies against infectious diseases.

Currently there is no vaccine proven to protect against SARS-CoV-2 infection.
A vaccine is urgently needed for several important reasons:


The large number of people infected


The ability of the virus to spread from person to person


The spread of the virus across so many geographic areas


By Rebecca Hughes


Neal Browning becomes the second volunteer to receive the investigational COVID-19 vaccine in the NIH-supported clinical trial in Seattle.
Credit: Ted S.
Warren / AP Photos



####
document number 5: 
Merkel went shopping for loo roll and soap in busy supermarket hours before she was forced into coronavirus quarantine




GERMAN Chancellor Angela Merkel was spotting shopping for loo roll and soap in a busy supermarket hours before she was forced into quarantine.

Ms Merkel, 65, was told on Sunday after a press conference that the doctor who gave her a vaccine had tested positive for coronavirus.

⚠️ Read our coronavirus live blog for the latest news updates



German Chancellor Angela Merkel was spotting shopping for loo roll and wine over the weekend Credit: Splash News



Ms Merkel spent about half an hour getting good before checking out from the supermarket in Berlin Credit: Splash News


She was seen shopping over the weekend pushing a cart with loo roll, wine, soap and other goods in Berlin for about half an hour.

The Chancellor did not wear a face mask, and she went shopping before being notified about the doctor's diagnosis.

She was informed about the doctor's test shortly after holding a news conference on Sunday about new measures to curb the spread of the virus, her spokesman Steffen Seibert said.

The Chancellor had received a precautionary vaccine against pneumococcal infection on Friday, Mr Seibert said.

In a statement, he also said that Merkel would undergo "regular tests" in the coming days and continue with her work from home for the time being.

The Chancellor is optimistic that will she not come down with virus because only had brief contact with the doctor.



Helge Braun, her chief of staff, said on a talk show on ARD television late on Sunday: "Given that, we are optimistic that the chancellor is perhaps not infected at all."

Merkel had earlier expressed her gratitude to Germans who were following the rules on social distancing, saying it was important to remain at least 1.5-metres (about five feet) apart to reduce the likelihood of infection.

She said: "Thank you.
I know it means making sacrifices, both personal and economic.

"I am very moved that so many people are obeying the rules.
That's how we show that we care for older people and the sick, for whom the virus is the most dangerous.
In short, that's how we save lives.

"The great aim is to gain time in the fight against the virus."

She also announced a nationwide ban on public meetings of more than two people outside work, saying the ban would be in place for at least two weeks.

Merkel told reporters: "The development illustrated how even world leaders aren't free from the risk of infection.

"With a certain distance the risk of infections is reduced almost to zero.

"Whether you are half a meter apart or 1.5 meters apart makes a huge difference."


Merkel was also seen with soap in her shopping cart over the weekend Credit: Splash News





Ms Merkel, 65, was informed about the doctor's test shortly after holding a news conference Sunday Credit: EPA



Best coronavirus memes - People are finding entertainment wherever they can during self-isolation



####
document number 6: 
GSK reports positive data from trials of RSV vaccine candidates


GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) has reported positive results from Phase I/II clinical trials of Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) vaccine candidates for maternal immunisation and older adults.

Data showed that the two FDA fast-tracked candidate vaccines trigger robust immune response and are well-tolerated.

RSV is a major cause of respiratory infections, such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia, in infants and older adults.

Both RSV vaccines are made of recombinant subunit pre-fusion RSV antigen (RSVPreF3) that can potentially trigger the required immune response.

The vaccine for older adults also includes GSK’s AS01 adjuvant system to boost the immune response since this group tends to show a weaker immune response to vaccination as compared to younger adults.

Initially, the vaccine candidate for older adults was tested in 48 healthy participants aged between 18 and 40 and then in 1,005 healthy adults aged between 60 and 80.
Either different dosages of antigen plus adjuvant or placebo was administered.

Interim data obtained after a month of immunisation showed that the candidate vaccine elicited a humoral and cellular immunity compared with baseline.

A ten fold increase in protective antibodies was also noted in immunised participants.

Importantly, the cellular immunity of the vaccinated older adults was boosted to reach range to that observed in the younger adults after vaccination with the non-adjuvanted formulation.

In 502 healthy non-pregnant women, the maternal RSV vaccine was tested with three different doses over monthly visits at day eight, 31 and 91, post-immunisation.

According to the results, the vaccine was able to rapidly boost the pre-existing immunity at all dose levels as compared to the baseline.

A 14-fold increase in RSV-A and RSV-B neutralising antibodies titers was also observed at day eight.

GlaxoSmithKline senior vice-president and Vaccines R head Emmanuel Hanon said: "We are delighted to see these positive results confirming our approach to develop dedicated vaccines building on the strategic use of our platform technologies for the populations most at risk from RSV infections – young infants and older adults."

GSK plans to progress these assets to Phase III trials to analyse their potential efficacy in the coming months.



####
document number 7: 
Case study: India’s leadership in the fight against Japanese encephalitis



Summary: India has been, and can continue to be, a model for how countries introduce the Japanese encephalitis vaccine.
The World Health Organization now recommends the strategy that India employed: first conducting catch-up campaigns in high-burden districts before transitioning to routine immunization.


In 2005, a massive outbreak of Japanese encephalitis (JE) occurred in the Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Thousands of people fell ill, and more than 1,500 died.

When the outbreak hit, authorities in India recognized that ongoing mosquito control measures, such as spraying insecticides, were not stopping the virus.
They needed an affordable, safe, effective, and long-term solution.

They needed a vaccine.

The outbreak prompted officials to intensify efforts and implement a national strategy for JE control through immunization.
Over the next 10 years and beyond, the government of India (GoI) successfully implemented a sustainable and effective JE vaccination program—first, by vaccinating India’s children at highest risk and then by expanding routine JE vaccination in hundreds of endemic districts across the country.
Thanks to India’s leadership, other countries in Asia have a strong example of how to tackle this once-neglected disease.

Here’s how India fought back and, along the way, paved the way for other countries to tackle JE.

Learn more

By the time of the 2005 outbreak, JE was already a known threat.
Because of India’s increasing irrigation of rice fields that act as a breeding ground for JE-infected mosquitoes, this risk was likely increasing.
India’s first clinically confirmed JE case was in 1955, with outbreaks occurring regularly in several high-risk areas across the country.
The first major epidemic was reported in 1973, followed by another outbreak in 1976.
Noticing the threat of JE, the National Vector Borne Disease Control Program (NVBDCP) began monitoring JE incidence nationwide in 1978.
Over the next 40 years, cases of JE were regularly reported in 26 states and territories, and outbreaks occurred in 15 states.

In an effort to address JE, the government introduced vector control measures, such as insecticide spraying, in the 1970s.
These measures, however, had little impact on the burden of disease.

PATH’s initial work on JE immunization in India began in 2000 in Andhra Pradesh.
PATH was working in partnership with the government of Andhra Pradesh to strengthen routine immunization services and introduce hepatitis B vaccines.
Conversations with district- and state-level health officers, however, revealed growing concern about JE.
Investigation of encephalitis outbreaks and improved disease surveillance and diagnostics suggested a previously unrecognized high incidence of JE, prompting the government of Andhra Pradesh to act quickly.
With technical assistance from PATH, Andhra Pradesh successfully introduced a mouse brain-derived JE vaccine in 2001.
In the first year of vaccination, observed JE cases reduced by 90 percent.

This experience was shared across India and prompted Indian government ministries, the World Health Organization (WHO), UNICEF, and PATH to establish a cross-sectoral India JE working group to coordinate technical support and information-sharing.
The working group developed a roadmap for planning JE vaccination programs.
Repeated outbreaks, combined with national awareness-raising advocacy campaigns, drove the governments of various Indian states to raise their voices and demand solutions for JE control.

The GoI heard these requests.
After the deadly JE outbreak in 2005, the GoI decided to incorporate lessons learned in Andhra Pradesh to initiate a large-scale, unprecedented emergency vaccination campaign in all of India’s JE-endemic states to protect children from future outbreaks.

Just one obstacle stood in the way: they needed a different vaccine.

While an Indian-produced, mouse brain-derived vaccine was used to immunize children in Andhra Pradesh and other areas, the available supply fell far short of the volume needed to reach children across the entire country.
Around 100 million children in India would need to be vaccinated, and the manufacturer of the existing mouse brain-derived vaccine could only produce less than half a million doses per year.
The vaccine also had a complicated dosing schedule and was very expensive—both challenging obstacles to vaccination programs.

Another vaccine produced in China, now known as CD-JEV, offered a potential solution to India’s challenges.
CD-JEV was safe, effective, and affordable and required only one dose to achieve immunity.
PATH spearheaded negotiations with the vaccine’s manufacturer, the Chengdu Institute of Biological Products, to establish a price that was affordable for low-resource JE-endemic countries.
Based on recommendations from technical experts and existing evidence on the vaccine’s safety and efficacy from China and Nepal, the first country outside of China to use the vaccine, India self-financed and imported CD-JEV for the vaccination campaign.

With a safe, available, and affordable vaccine in hand, the GoI launched a large-scale, five-year JE vaccination campaign in 2006.
It was India’s most ambitious immunization program to date.
In just the first year, the campaigns targeted children and adolescents in 11 high-risk districts of four states and reached more than 9 million children.
Vaccines were administered to 88 percent of the target population.
Over the course of the five-year campaign from 2006 to 2011, nearly 78 million children in 109 districts of 15 states were immunized against JE.

Following the success of the five-year campaign, the government of India knew it needed to scale JE vaccination to additional JE-endemic districts and transition from campaigns to sustained routine immunization.
New districts and states were reporting JE cases, and low routine immunization coverage rates left room for improvement.
Using surveillance data to prioritize higher-risk areas, JE vaccination gradually expanded from the initial 11 districts in 4 states to 269 districts in 21 states between 2011 and 2018.
The GoI has targeted 669 districts—almost all of India—for eventual scale-up.

PATH continued to support India’s JE control efforts in the transition to routine JE vaccination.
From 2013 to 2015, the governments of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar asked PATH for assistance with scaling up and improving coverage of their JE routine immunization programs, as well as improving clinical management of encephalitis cases to reduce mortality.
At the national level, PATH helped strengthen India’s nationwide encephalitis surveillance efforts and helped conduct vaccine impact assessments.

As PATH’s 15-year JE project comes to a close, the efforts of Indian officials to combat JE have continued to grow.
As of mid-2018, coverage of routine JE immunization in the districts with the vaccine is estimated at 65 percent.
Since 2006, roughly 156 million Indian children have been vaccinated against JE, and India continues to self-fund the vaccination program using the affordable CD-JEV vaccine.
An additional 38 districts are planning to conduct JE vaccination campaigns in 2018 and 2019.

Lessons learned in India informed other endemic countries’ experiences as they considered JE vaccine introduction.
Because India was only the second country outside China to use the CD-JEV vaccine, data on its use and evaluation in India reinforced earlier data on the vaccine’s safety and effectiveness and contributed to the WHO prequalification of CD-JEV in 2013.

India’s experience also helped inform WHO recommendations on JE vaccine introduction strategies in other countries.
India’s strategy of conducting catch-up campaigns in high-burden, high-priority districts first, followed by routine JE immunization, was recommended by WHO and has been mirrored by several other countries.



Perhaps most importantly, India set an example for the region.
From the beginning, the driving force behind India’s efforts against JE has been the desire of local, state, and national officials to sustainably protect children from a dangerous disease.
Building on a strong foundation of both local and global evidence, input from partners, and ever-adjusting strategies informed by experience, India is making significant progress in reducing the burden of JE.

Other countries can do—and are now doing—the same.



####
document number 8: 
Zika virus cases spread in Latin America, Caribbean



Haiti, Ecuador and Brazil have announced that they have been hit by an outbreak of the Zika virus, a mosquito-borne ailment that causes birth defects and is rapidly spreading through Latin America and the Caribbean.

The Zika virus is transmitted by Aedes species mosquitoes, which also spread dengue and chikungunya viruses.
Zika causes a mild illness with fever, rash, joint pain and conjunctivitis, with symptoms usually lasting under a week.

But in pregnant women, the virus can spread to the fetus and cause brain shrinkage - a rare condition called microcephaly that severely limits a child's intellectual and physical development - or death.


Brazil has been the hardest hit, documenting more than 3,500 cases of microcephaly between October 2015 and January 2016.

Four of those cases have recently been analysed, showing that babies were infected with the Zika virus while they were in the womb and that it reached their brains.

Two of the cases involved miscarriages, and two of the babies died soon after birth.
The Brazilian government said on Saturday it was directing funds to a biomedical research centre to help develop a vaccine against the virus.

Ecuador confirms cases

Ecuador said on Friday it has detected two new cases of the Zika virus in the country.
Officials had previously detected four people who arrived from other countries with the disease.
But this is the first time it has been transmitted on Ecuadorian soil, said Veronica Espinosa, deputy cabinet minister responsible for monitoring outbreaks.

"We have now detected, confirmed by laboratory tests, the first two native cases.
That is, we now have cases of the virus being transmitted by mosquito bites that happened in Ecuadoran territory," she told a press conference.

First Haiti detection

Also on Friday, Haiti's Public Health Minister Florence Duperval Guillaume said there have been five confirmed cases of the Zika virus in the country.
All the cases are in the area of Port-au-Prince, the overcrowded capital.

The United States on Friday warned pregnant women to avoid travel to 14 countries and territories in the Caribbean and Latin America due to the virus.

The level two travel alert applies to Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Martinique, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, Venezuela and Puerto Rico.



####
document number 9: 
Enrollment is complete for Moderna’s Phase 3 COVID-19 vaccine trial



PPD assisted Moderna with Phase 3 COVID-19 vaccine trial enrollment and Remdesivir clinical trials



CAMBRIDGE, MA (WECT) - Following advancement to Phase 3 of its coronavirus vaccine trial in June 2020, Moderna, Inc.
announced Thursday it had completed enrollment of 30,000 trial participants.

The Phase 3 study was designed to evaluate those at highest risk of COVID-19, so enrollment included more than 7,000 Americans over the age of 65 and 5,000 Americans under 65 who have high-risk chronic diseases like diabetes, heart disease or chronic obesity.

According to the press release from Moderna, the U.S. government has committed up to $1.525 billion to purchase supply of mRNA-1273 under U.S. Department of Defense Contract.

Dr.
John Fleming, a physician and member of the White House coronavirus task force, said in an interview Thursday, he believes the first doses of coronavirus vaccines could go out to the most vulnerable patients by the end of the year.



####
document number 10: 
Kimera® Labs Files First FDA Investigational New Drug (IND) Application Using XoGlo® for Treatment of ARDS Secondary to COVID-19


MIRAMAR, Fla., Aug.
18, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Kimera® Labs Inc, a privately held clinical stage biotechnology company, announces the filing of an extended FDA Investigational New Drug (IND) application to study the treatment of COVID-19 related inflammatory disease using Kimera's first-in-class XoGlo® isolated placental mesenchymal stem cell-based exosomes.
Founded in 2012, Kimera® generated the first publicly available isolated exosome product.
Kimera currently employs 40 PhDs, technicians and staff at its Miramar Florida 27,000 sq. ft.
GMP manufacturing facility, the first and only laboratory dedicated solely to exosome R and production in the US.

Exosomes have been referenced in scientific and medical publications to exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, including recently published articles on their investigational use for the treatment of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) secondary to COVID-19 infection.
Kimera® believes that its strict donor screening practices, ultra purification methods, and current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMPs) ensure the quality and purity of its exosome products for the intended IND clinical trial.
The Company is proposing a 160 patient clinical trial in a non-hospital ambulatory setting.

"I am very proud to have overseen the development of this company from its creation without outside investment to the delivery of a robust FDA IND application, in advance of the stipulated FDA conformance May 2021 date," stated Kimera® Labs founder and CEO, Duncan Ross PhD.
"Our completed IND document was a six year project that involved the input of a team of passionate scientists operating without a guidebook in a novel, constantly evolving field of virus sized particles."

Since 2016, Kimera® has invested in unrivaled in-house research and production capacity to support additional IND applications coming over the next 12 months.
Kimera® employs a number of in-house laboratory assays and proprietary exosome characterization methods, including its ONI super-resolution microscope which uses Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM), to better characterize and optimize its exosome products.
Jan Torres, COO of Kimera®, states that "this significant investment has allowed us to put forth what we hope to be the most well-described extracellular vesicle IND application at this time.
Furthermore, we hope that these well characterized proofs will allow us to output multiple IND-approved therapeutic treatments for various afflictions within the next two years."

SOURCE Kimera Labs Inc

Related Links


http://www.kimeralabs.com



####
document number 11: 
Ebola virus and U.S. preparedness: Research on quarantines, treatments, transmission



The first U.S. case of Ebola was reported on September 25, 2014, when a man who had earlier traveled to Liberia sought help in a Dallas hospital.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formally confirmed the diagnosis three days later.
That patient, Thomas Eric Duncan, eventually died, and two health workers who had contact with him contracted the virus.
While Ebola is contagious only when those affected are experiencing active symptoms, Duncan was sent home after an initial visit to the hospital.
Further, a New York City doctor who recently returned from West Africa has also been infected.

The current outbreak of Ebola in West Africa is the deadliest in the history of the disease, with thousands of infections and deaths in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
The two latter countries could see 1.4 million cases by January 2015, according to CDC estimates.
The disease was first identified in 1976, appearing simultaneously in Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Until now the number of cases has been fairly limited, but the fatality rates are high — anywhere from 25% to 90%; the average is 50% — depending on the strain of virus and the care received.

The World Health Organization has concluded that both Nigeria and Senegal appear to have stopped the spread of the disease, ending its transmission in those countries.
Many top U.S. health experts say that, despite widespread fear, there remains a very low chance of an epidemic in America.
Based on National Safety Council data, the

Washington Post

calculated that the lifetime odds of dying of Ebola in the United States are 1 in 3,934,300 — compared to 1 in 491 for a car crash, 1 in 79 for the flu and 1 in 7 for heart disease.

Quarantines and legal authority

Following policy decisions by New Jersey and New York, there remain deep questions about the efficacy of quarantines in the United States, and related legal and ethical considerations.
The Congressional Research Service has published a brief on legal issues relating to screening and detaining incoming international travelers at airports, and domestic issues of quarantines.
An October 2014 paper from Mark A. Rothstein at the University of Louisville, "From SARS to Ebola: Legal and Ethical Considerations for Modern Quarantine," provides a survey of legal and ethical questions that remain unresolved:

The federal government has the constitutional authority under the Commerce Clause to impose quarantine to prevent the international and interstate spread of infection, and this responsibility has been delegated to the CDC.
Nevertheless, the states maintain primary responsibility for public health, including quarantine.
Many of the state quarantine laws date to the early twentieth century.
The anthrax attack in 2001 provided the impetus for updating these laws to modernize and streamline state public health emergency response.
Although all of the states have updated their laws, at least to some extent, these efforts must be considered works in progress.
Some of the model laws used as templates for modernization have been criticized for failing to include adequate protections for civil liberties and due process.
Virtually all of the laws lack key ancillary measures needed for successful quarantine, such as prohibiting employment discrimination against individuals in quarantine and providing for temporary income replacement so that individuals will not be tempted to violate the quarantine and go to work.

Past surveys of state legal policies also show variations in the scope of available powers.
For more, see the following academic papers from legal scholars: "Pandemic Influenza: Ethics, Law, and the Public’s Health"; and "Public Health Versus Personal Liberty: The Uneasy Case for Individual Detention, Isolation and Quarantine."

Treatments, therapies and new drugs

As a 2014 article in the

Journal of the American Medical Association

(JAMA) points out, Ebola has been around for many years now, but little progress has been made in terms of treatment: "Since 1976 more than 15 Ebola outbreaks have erupted in sub Saharan Africa, yet therapeutic options remain undeveloped.
There are no licensed vaccines or specific antiviral or immune-mediated treatments for ill patients or for post-exposure prophylaxis."
An experimental drug, ZMapp, is under development, but large-scale medical trials and anything resembling wide-scale availability are far in the future — if it’s effective, which is an open question at this point.
Logistical problems and a lack of funding have hampered efforts to deploy experimental drugs and vaccines, as the journal

Nature

notes.

The Broad Institute, jointly run by Harvard and MIT, has reported some progress in getting a fuller understanding of the genomics of the disease and its mutations, as reported in the journal

Science

.

While there is an urgent need to rapidly accelerate the testing of new treatments, doing so has potential downsides as well.
As the University of Pennsylvania’s Dr.
Steven Joffe writes, "efforts to evaluate novel agents risk diverting attention and human and material assets from proven therapeutic and public health measures.
Well-motivated initiatives directed at promising new therapies must not jeopardize existing health infrastructures."

In an October 2014 article published

The New England Journal of Medicine

, leading researchers note:

Even if adequate safety and immunogenicity are demonstrated in the phase 1 studies, vaccines will not be available in substantial quantity until the first quarter of 2015 at the earliest.
For that to occur, funding must be secured for production.
Even if an effective vaccine can be produced, it is not likely to be 100% effective, so to succeed in stemming the current outbreak, a coordinated effort to improve capacity and provide clinical care in affected countries needs to be scaled up urgently.

An October 2014 letter published in

The Lancet

suggests that one promising research avenue is to investigate those who appear to have an immunity to Ebola, as "many Ebola infections are asymptomatic."
The article notes that "although asymptomatic infections are unlikely to be infectious, they might confer protective immunity and thus have important epidemiological consequences."

Finally, the lack of an effective drug to treat Ebola has also become a political issue.
"NIH has been working on Ebola vaccines since 2001.
It’s not like we suddenly woke up and thought, ‘Oh my gosh, we should have something ready here,'" Dr.
Francis Collins, the head of the National Institutes of Health, has said.
"Frankly, if we had not gone through our 10-year slide in research support, we probably would have had a vaccine in time for this that would’ve gone through clinical trials and would have been ready."

Potential for a large-scale outbreak

While Ebola virus is extremely dangerous, its transmission rate is lower than that of many other diseases.
"As long as people are under proper care and appropriate precautions are taken, there’s no reason to think we can’t control the transmission of the virus," Harvard’s Michael VanRooyen has said.
"So in that sense, it’s not like SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome] or MERS [Middle East respiratory syndrome], for example, where we would worry about an epidemic spreading in the United States."

In terms of the global spread of the disease, an October 2014 study published in

The Lancet

notes: "Based on epidemic conditions and international flight restrictions to and from Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone as of Sept 1, 2014 (reductions in passenger seats by 51% for Liberia, 66% for Guinea, and 85% for Sierra Leone), our model projects 2·8 travellers infected with Ebola virus departing the above three countries via commercial flights, on average, every month."

Contagiousness is measured by the average number of people whom a sick person will infect.
This is strongly influenced by the specifics of each illness — when a person becomes infectious themselves after catching the disease, and how the disease can be transmitted.
The transmission rate is called the disease reproduction factor and is referred to as "R0" or "R nought."

One of the most infectious diseases is measles: In an unvaccinated population, a sick person will infect 18 others on average.
(Because the vast majority of the U.S. population is vaccinated against measles, in practice its reproduction rate is effectively zero.)
By comparison, the reproduction rate for mumps is 10, and that for SARS is 4.
HIV is also 4, while Hepatitis C’s rate is approximately 2.

A September 2014 study in

PLoS Current Outbreaks

, "Assessing the International Spreading Risk Associated with the 2014 West African Ebola Outbreak," indicates that the reproduction rate for Ebola is between 1.5 and 2.
Two factors are at play: First, sick people become infectious themselves only when they begin to show symptoms.
Second, direct contact is required for the disease to be transmitted.
Still, because there is no vaccine against Ebola, extreme caution is warranted, and missteps by the Dallas Hospital have increased the chance that others may have been infected.

The study also models the international spreading of the outbreak — the case in Dallas was the first outside Africa — and estimates the probability of Ebola virus appearing in countries around the world.
The results indicate that in the short term, the probability of international spread is "small but not negligible," and could increase if the disease continues to advance in Africa.
Countries outside Africa with the highest probability of outbreaks include the United Kingdom, Belgium and France, in part because of significant air-traffic flows.

Science and the airborne transmission hypothesis

One of the most controversial issues implicated in the current outbreak is the issue of whether Ebola can be transmitted through the air.
Scientists do not believe it can, based on the most recent lab experiments.
The CDC summarizes the findings of several studies as follows: "Airborne transmission of Ebola virus has been hypothesized but not demonstrated in humans.
While Ebola virus can be spread through airborne particles under experimental conditions in animals, this type of spread has not been documented during human EVD outbreaks in settings such as hospitals or households."

In terms of citations for this claim, a 2014

Nature

study performed a careful test involving primates in a lab setting and did not find evidence of airborne transmission.
That is the best and most recent evidence.
The CDC does note two 1995 studies and a 2011 study that drew different, though not necessarily contradictory, conclusions.
An October 2014 letter in

The Lancet

presents what is known about the need for respiratory protection.

U.S. preparedness and concerns

The United States has been planning and practicing for pandemics since the 1970s, and experts note that the "pillars" of this public health work remain basically the same: surveillance; vaccination and medical countermeasures; emergency response coordination; and communications.

For U.S. facilities to prepare for Ebola, there will need to be a variety of unique systems and protocols put into place, health experts note.
A 2014 article in the

Annals of Internal Medicine

spells out four crucial steps: "First, staff education is vital to ‘demystifying’ Ebola and reducing anxiety; second, posters clarifying PPE [personal protective equipment] donning and doffing procedures facilitate staff understanding and compliance; and third, an ongoing, coordinated multidisciplinary effort is required to establish standard operating procedures and staff must be trained to follow them; and finally, direct observation of clinical care enforces adherence to these procedures."
However, all new systems, equipment and public health protocols carry with them the possibility of introducing new risks.
Top experts on health procedures and systems say that an Ebola epidemic is preventable in the United States if strict protocols are followed.

In recent years, the CDC has warned about gaps in epidemiology capacity in state health departments; other academic survey-based research has also furnished warnings about decreased capacity.
Recent crises have seen relatively successful outcomes, but they have been by no means without cost, as noted in a 2013 study in the journal

Emerging Infectious Diseases

:

Although the 2009 A(H1N1)pdm09 pandemic spread globally within a matter of weeks, a 1918-like pandemic did not materialize.
Nonetheless, this most recent pandemic resulted in [approximately] 12,500 deaths in the United States, [approximately] 90% of which occurred in persons [younger than] 65 years of age.
In the wake of this pandemic, the challenge in preparedness is to sustain the interest of private and public sectors in planning for a large-scale outbreak that may have a much more severe effect at a time that cannot be predicted.

A 2014 paper in the

New England Journal of Medicine

, "Pandemic Preparedness and Response: Lessons from the H1N1 Influenza of 2009," offers deep analysis on what research and experience have revealed, and how that might influence future disease outbreaks.
The author, Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg of the Institute of Medicine, notes recent "operational missteps" by the World Health Organization, and "in light of these structural impediments and operational deficiencies, the world was very fortunate that the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic was not more severe."

Further resources: Also see the Congressional Research Service report "Ebola: Basics about the Disease."
Other vital sources of research-based information on the virus are

The Lancet

’s Ebola Research Centre, the Ebola Communication Network (USAID and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health) and the World Health Organization.

Keywords: infectious diseases, pandemics, disease outbreaks, Ebola, influenza, quarantines



####
document number 12: 
Start A Business By Helping Others



Many people have this idea that they can start a business by helping others.
But few act on their instincts.

Kathryn Jones is one of those who decided to turn her passion for improving others’ lives into a business that is helping children who are facing medical treatment get the emotional support they need.

Kathryn is co-founder and head of product development for SuperHealos, a company dedicated to helping children facing medical treatment feel like superheroes.

Before living life as an entrepreneur, Kathryn was in fashion and event coordination, organizing events all over Manhattan including the famed Mercedes Benz fashion shows.


Although the fast paced environment was exciting, her love of helping others prompted her to start a second career as an Occupational Therapist.
Through physical rehab, she helps people of all ages live their lives as independently and meaningfully as possible.

Working at the hospital bedsides of children and families, Kathryn realized that fear of the unknown was the worst thing for someone trying to recover from illness and injury.
When approached by a good friend and asked to start SuperHealos, a company focused on using superheroes and education to reduce fear for children facing medical treatment, she jumped at the chance.
As well as enjoying the opportunity to merge her passions for design and health care, Kathryn is loving her new title as a "superhero of health!"

Listen to the story of how Kathryn and her partner dove right in when the idea struck them for SuperHealos.
They did not rely on extensive market research—instead, they started with nothing more than their passion and basic materials to create their first prototype products (superhero capes) for children.
"I think being naive helps us quite a bit, because [starting a business] can be very paralyzing," Kathryn says.

She talks about running a successful Kickstarter campaign, along with getting a lot of support through the InnoLoft, an accelerator program sponsored by Constant Contact in Boston.

Show Sponsors


LeadPages let’s you launch and test landing pages, pop-up sign up forms and more.
Find out why it is the industry’s leading solution for landing pages.

Increase your visibility, thought leadership and lead generation efforts by being a guest on top podcasts.
Let the experts at Interview Valet propel your business to the next level.

SiteGround is a top web host for startups — with plans starting at just $3.95 per month.

The Ultimate Business Checklist will give you all the steps you need to take when starting your company, including estimated costs and timeframes.

Show Links


Disclosure of Material Connection: Some of the links in the post above are "affiliate links."
This means if you click on the link and purchase the item, I will receive an affiliate commission.
Regardless, I only recommend products or services I use personally and believe will add value to my readers.
I am disclosing this in accordance with the Federal Trade Commission's 16 CFR, Part 255: "Guides Concerning the Use of Endorsements and Testimonials in Advertising."



####
document number 13: 
The Real Story of Remdesivir


Taxpayers are spending at least $70.5 million to develop the drug

Remdesivir, an experimental COVID-19 treatment, has benefited significantly from public funding.
Based off publicly available data, Public Citizen estimates that taxpayers are contributing at least $70.5 million to develop remdesivir.
[1] The real number is likely higher.
We trace the story below.

Federal scientists helped discover remdesivir’s potential.

(Taxpayer support: at least $34.5 million)


In 2015, federal scientists screened a thousand compounds from a Gilead library in search of a molecule to target Ebola virus.
After identifying a remdesivir precursor, U.S. Army scientists worked with the corporation to "refine, develop and evaluate the compound.
"[2] The government partnership was "critical to the successful identification of [remdesivir].
"[3] A team led by federal scientists found that remdesivir was active against coronaviruses, "suggesting the potential for wider medical use.
"[4]

In addition to providing in-kind support, the Department of Defense funded Gilead directly.
A 2017 government report notes that DOD "is cost sharing with Gilead Biosciences [sic] for continued development of this product.
"[5] So far, DOD has given Gilead $34.5 million.
[6] The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has also led two Ebola remdesivir trials, likely supported by millions of taxpayer dollars.
[7] This laid the groundwork for the current response.

The NIH funded university researchers to study remdesivir’s effects against coronaviruses.

(Taxpayer support: at least $6 million)


As part of its nearly $700 million investment in coronavirus research, the NIH awarded University of North Carolina researchers a $6 million grant to accelerate the development of remdesivir.
[8] NIH researchers also made significant advances.
Federal scientists found that remdesivir could reduce lung damage in monkeys with an earlier coronavirus, as well as the new coronavirus.
[9]

National governments are running COVID-19 remdesivir clinical trials.

(Taxpayer support: at least $30 million)


Public funding is supporting many clinical trials across the world.
The World Health Organization, a European consortium, and Chinese public institutions all began remdesivir trials.
[10] In the U.S., the NIH is running a trial that will cost at least $30 million this fiscal year alone.
[11] Taxpayers are taking significant risk.
If remdesivir proves safe and effective, they should not have to pay twice.

[1] We draw on Knowledge Ecology International’s Briefing Note prepared by Kathryn Ardizzone, https://www.keionline.org/BN-2020-1

[2] https://www.usamriid.army.mil/press_releases/Travis%20ID%20Week%20FINAL.pdf

[3] Dustin Siegel et al., Discovery and Synthesis of GS-5734 for the Treatment of Ebola and Emerging Viruses, J Med Chem (2017).

[4] HHS, Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise Strategy and Implementation Plan (2017)

[5]

Id.


[6] OTA: W911QY1690001 ($33.3 million) and W911QY1630001 ($1.2 million).

[7] NCT03719586 and NCT02818582

[8] Public Citizen, Blind Spot (2020), https://www.citizen.org/article/blind-spot/.
For remdesivir specifically, see https://tinyurl.com/yd2ckoaf.
The NIH also awarded university researchers a $37.5 million grant to help develop treatments for coronaviruses, including remdesivir, among other projects.
https://tinyurl.com/ybyq4grb.

[9] https://tinyurl.com/sl2q638 and https://tinyurl.com/y9oartxq

[10] SOLIDARITY, INSERM (2020-000936-23), Chinese studies (NCT04252664, NCT04257656.)

[11] https://tinyurl.com/yakvqcja (NIH email correspondence with Wall Street Journal reporter).



####
document number 14: 
Down the COVID-19 vaccine pipeline






####
document number 15: 
Treatment works and recovery is possible


Reaching out for help led to a better life


Veterans describe an effective therapy method


Exposure therapy can provide relief and recovery


Read VA's latest coronavirus information.
If you have flu-like symptoms such as fever, cough, and shortness of breath, please call before you visit your local medical center or clinic.
If you have an appointment, consider making it a telehealth appointment.

Just like physical health, mental health is important at every stage of life and is essential to your overall well-being.

Although Veterans can often recognize when to treat their physical injuries, it can be harder for them to identify mental health or readjustment challenges.
Some Veterans — or their loved ones — may notice symptoms and experiences affecting their lives, but aren’t sure what to do about them.
Others may think nothing can be done or may have concerns about the impact of treatment.

About Seeking Mental Health Treatment



For almost every mental health condition, there are a number of effective treatments that can help you cope with symptoms and greatly improve your quality of life.


You may need to work with your physician or mental health professional and to try different types of treatment before finding the one that’s best for you.
VA specializes in providing care for Veterans, and it has clinicians who can help you find the right combination of care and treatment for your unique situation.


Most treatments can produce positive and meaningful changes in symptoms and quality of life after just a brief amount of time.


Treatment can help you understand your condition and change how you think about it, in part by identifying steps to improve your response to emotional triggers, stressful situations, and other challenges in your life.



Types of Treatment


The following types of treatment may be used independently or in combination:


Therapy or counseling can help you learn new ways of thinking, practice positive behaviors, and take active steps to move beyond your symptoms.
Cognitive behavioral therapy is one type of counseling that research shows is effective for a number of different mental health challenges.
Therapy or counseling may be one-on-one, in a group, with you and your family, or some combination of these approaches.


Medications work in different ways to manage the chemicals in your brain that may affect the way you feel.


Self-help approaches may be used to support other treatments and may include participating in 12-step meetings and using apps or other tools suggested by your treatment provider.
VA has developed useful Web-based training tools and apps for Veterans, several of which can be found here: www.veterantraining.va.gov


Peer support services, in which Veterans who have experienced mental health challenges themselves provide support to fellow Veterans, can be a powerful resource during the journey of recovery.



VA’s Guide to Mental Health Services describes what happens when you request mental health services from VA, discusses the different settings in which treatment is delivered, and lists the treatments for specific conditions, as well as providing other helpful information.

When to Get Treatment



Whether you just returned from a deployment, were stateside during your whole time in service, or have been home for 40 years, it’s never too late to get treatment or support for the challenges you face.
Even Veterans who didn’t realize they were dealing with a mental health condition for many years have improved their lives with treatment.


If you’ve just started experiencing symptoms — even if you aren’t even sure if anything is really wrong — reach out now.
Receiving treatment as soon as possible may help prevent your symptoms from getting worse.



Factors That Can Affect Treatment



Some conditions occur alongside other mental or physical challenges, which may mask certain symptoms or make them worse.
It’s helpful to have a full physical exam and mental health assessment for an accurate understanding of what’s going on.


Sometimes, alcohol or drug use can make mental health conditions worse and their treatments less effective.
Reducing your alcohol or drug use may be an important step toward getting the full benefits of your treatment.
There are VA and community treatment options available to help you decrease your alcohol or drug use, if needed.



Recovering from a mental health challenge is a process that involves hope, action, problem-solving, and tapping into or building up your support system — in addition to close guidance from a trained professional.
In recent years, research from around the world has dramatically increased our understanding of mental health conditions and how to treat them, enabling the successful treatment and recovery every day of Veterans who experience these conditions.
Our video gallery has hundreds of real stories from Veterans whose lives prove that treatment can work and recovery is possible.



####




**************************************************************************************************************
query = develop biological agent
document number 1: 
ISIS Chemical-Weapons Expert Speaks


exclusive

Photo Illustration by Lyne Lucien/The Daily Beast


BAGHDAD—"ISIS was looking for scientists," said Ahmed, a 36-year-old follower of the so-called Islamic State who holds a Ph.D. in medicinal chemistry and drug design.
And Ahmed was looking for a chance to put his scientific knowledge to use.

This would not be theoretical research.
ISIS and al Qaeda before it have been working since at least the 1990s to obtain biological and chemical weapons.
But as with many gruesome enterprises, ISIS has been more methodical than its predecessors and competitors.


We do not yet know for sure the extent to which ISIS was successful and cannot confirm some of the claims made by Ahmed, but they fit with those made by an Iraqi geologist, Suleiman al-Afari, who told

The Washington Post

recently that he supervised a mustard gas production line for the Islamic State.

We also know that ISIS, through its global social media and internet recruiting, managed to create a corps of scientists interacting in person and on dark web forums to support the creation of a WMD arsenal, and Ahmed, whose name has been changed here, was part of the team.
We interviewed him last month along with other ISIS prisoners being held in the Iraqi capital.

At the height of its power four years ago, ISIS’ worldwide recruiting effort offered top dollar to equip labs and support scientists to an extent much greater than anything Ahmed had been offered in Iraq, which basically was nothing.

"I knew I could synthesize the biological and chemical weapons I researched on the web," he told us.
"I just needed the supplies and a well-equipped lab."

U.S. coalition and Iraqi forces have recently announced the discovery of an installation in Mosul where ISIS was indeed working on such weapons, and Ahmed says he was involved in that same lab’s operations.

We should be careful not to confuse the attempts by ISIS to develop and use chemical weapons with the infamous attacks launched by the Syrian government of Bashar al-Assad.
Of an estimated 300 such attacks in Syria in the course of the conflict there, a new study from the Global Public Policy Institute (PDF) estimates 98 percent are attributable to the regime, and only about 2 percent to ISIS.


But the group’s aspirations in this regard, and some usage, is well documented.
For instance, the group successfully deployed mustard and chlorine gas against the Kurdish Peshmerga.
ISIS also set up a secret chemical weapons production facility in northern Iraq and has been quite innovative in using drones as dispersal devices for biological and chemical materials.

Surprisingly, research on the extent to which the group used or desired to expand on the use of chemical and biological weapons remains rare and largely under-researched, as noted in a report published last year by the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.

Ahmed, imprisoned inside the compounds of the Iraqi Special Operations Forces of the Iraqi Counter Terrorism Services, recounted in detail his rise from a promising but frustrated young scientist, to one who saw himself as a galvanized agent of social change at the time he joined ISIS, to his eventual capture.

Ahmed, like so many who joined and served ISIS, had come into contact with the group via social media while a Ph.D. student in India after a scientist friend, who was already working for them, encouraged him to join up.

While initially attracted to the idea of an "Islamic State," he claimed it was not so much the ideology as what he thought would be the ability to show off his scientific and technical skills that actually drew him to ISIS: "At first I was looking into their ideology because of their interest in science and technology.
I was convinced I would join an authentic scientific community.
Many scientists joined from many countries," he claimed in our interview.
"Lots of nuclear physicists and engineers, especially from Russia joined them."


Ahmed said he did not ever join the group physically, but supported them virtually and substantially.
Searching the worldwide web and pursuing scientific journals, some of which he hacked into, allowed him to pass on knowledge about manufacturing chemical and biological weapons to those scientists already working in the Mosul lab.

While Ahmed started his work for ISIS by spreading this research and interacting on web forums on behalf of the group in 2015 and 2016, he fully intended to join the lab in Mosul upon his graduation and was confident of his ability to create the desired chemical and biological weapons.
At the time, he believed ISIS was already an established state and would continue to expand.

"I would upload and [my research] would get read by the high command of the Caliphate," he told us.
"They were interested in my posts and asked how we can acquire these chemicals.
I also summarized books from a Russian website.
There are loads of [scientific] journals I could access on the web and it’s not classified.
I told them everything was in my summary, but also told them, you must have a real lab."

The operation in Mosul succeeded in producing mustard gas, which it dispersed in various operations using drones.
In Baghdad, we viewed pictures of victims allegedly burned in ISIS mustard gas attacks.

Ahmed and his research colleagues working in the Mosul lab were not the only ISIS members striving for biological weapons.
A chilling arrest occurred as recently as June 2018, in Germany, when Sief Allah H, a Tunisian man living in Cologne, was arrested after preparing the deadly biological poison ricin, made from castor beans.
Security sources told ICSVE—the International Center for the Study of Violent Extremism—that the police knew of his activities and that he was following instructions provided over the internet by ISIS, and that police surveillance of the operation was terminated and arrests made after he succeeded, but before he was actually able to deploy the infamous compound.


Ahmed proudly boasted about his knowledge of computer science and the ability to modify, synthesize, and manufacture lethal weapons from raw substances, at times appearing highly ecstatic and fervent in his answers during the interview.

"There are loads of scientific journals and it’s not classified.
You just have to access them through a scientific institution," said Ahmed, explaining how he managed to access the latest in science by going to the dark web and using a Russian website that cracked these journals’ codes.

"I used Russian search engines that no one can penetrate and a Tor browser to hide and search," Ahmed said.
"For instance, the first item I put up for them was from the journal of Organic Phosphorus Chemistry about VX gas in Israel.
It’s a new generation nerve agent.
The authors told how they made particle Isomers and structural modifications to enhance the activity of the gas in use," Ahmed said.
"I can tell a scientist about how to carry out the organic synthesis for this in micro quantities."

"There was one article on pyrophoric [flammable] materials from a hazardous materials journal," Ahmed went on.
"These pyrophoric materials become flammable with water and moisture creating gas, fire and choking smoke to cause asphyxiation.
The article was speaking about the flammability [of the materials] and what kind of gas was being generated, about the hazardous materials you could throw to troops, and on streets, on floating bridges, etc.
All the necessary materials are available on the market...
There was also a book from a Russian website about the experimental synthesis of all explosives.
For me, I can synthesize any of these.

"My friend [in ISIS] told me about WMD, that they were interested in making mustard gas, nitrogen, and sulfur.
Nerve agents are easy to synthesize," Ahmed said, noting that he was disappointed that ISIS wasn’t going further into the subjects he felt proficient in.

"It’s like writing a paper.
I can search and modify the structure.
I passed this to them.
If I gain access to a lab, then I can do it.
In our lab in India [where he was studying] I learned how to synthesize theoretically.
We take the structure into a software and see how it works on this nerve, then we try it on animals.
I synthesized for anti-diabetic and anti-epileptic activity and it worked, so I know I can do it for these substances as well."

Ahmed, who does not appear particularly connected to his own emotions, insisted that his work for ISIS was to help them as a state to be able to defend against and repel attackers.
When reminded that ISIS had been at war with the Iraqis, Syrians and Western powers at that point, he kept insisting that the weapons he hoped to build for them were only for defense.

He also seemed oblivious to ISIS’s already deployed use of mustard gas against civilian populations.
"My idea was to use weapons as a deterrent, not to be used against humankind."
He also seemed oblivious to the extraordinary brutality of ISIS during the time he was working for them and much more interested in and excited by the recognition he could achieve.

He hoped to branch out from poisons and plagues to explore new technologies for delivering them.
"I learned in the engineering world they [ISIS] were interested in anti-aircraft missiles and drones.
They complain about coalition jet fighters destroying their troops on the ground.
The admin on the website, there was a guy on the website who provided links from a British university to make drones from organic synthesis to make the whole body of the drone.
It was some kind of solution, liquid phase synthesis, polymer science.
We have already developed anti-aircraft missiles.
We were going to use them."


It appears that Ahmed was not particularly religious prior to joining ISIS.
He articulated only a very rudimentary grasp of the Islamic faith, which he said he rarely practiced.
"I was not very religious.
I was not looking for an Islamic State.
They [ISIS] were more interested in science and technology.
They were thinking forward.
My family is interested in science and technology.
I find religion suspicious."

Although incongruous on its face, it has been common for many ISIS recruits to believe that somehow the Caliphate could fulfill their dreams, even if those had little to do with the way ISIS twisted the teachings of the Quran and the sayings of the Prophet Muhammad.

Ahmed said he was deeply dissatisfied with widespread corruption and sectarian discrimination in the Iraqi job market following the 2003 toppling of the Saddam regime.
As a Sunni, and despite being qualified, he felt he was kept out of jobs in areas of national defense and in any government-sector related to science.

"Political things, the quality of the regime after 2003, it pushed me to interact and work against the regime," he said.
"I worked as a student in a lab in Iraq for four years.
It was not possible to gain employment there.
After, I worked in a pharmaceutical lab.
It was totally corrupt.
The whole facility was corrupt and it lacked in everything.
I was completely frustrated.
I considered it a primary school," he said.


Ahmed claimed he was compelled to look for jobs elsewhere, first in Qatar and then Bahrain and Abu Dhabi, but to no avail.
His disconnected personality probably contributed to his failure in that regard, but all the same he was a gifted individual frustrated by his inability to pursue his chosen field—until ISIS came along.

Ahmed was arrested in 2018 by the Kurdish security forces during an undercover counterterrorism operation in Erbil, the capital of the Iraq’s Kurdish regional government.
He was then handed over to the U.S. Army in Erbil for further interrogation and later transferred to Iraqi authorities in Baghdad.

While Ahmed claimed he had stopped working for ISIS after he looked more closely into their violent Islamic ideology, he continued to see himself, as many jihadists are encouraged to do, as a sort of chivalric hero and, in his case, a chemical whiz kid.

During our interview, he expressed regret over his decision to join ISIS.

"My advice to everyone in the world is not to believe [ISIS] propaganda and media.
Real jihad is to support your country and families and provide them with the best knowledge.
Don’t believe ISIS or join any upcoming group."

At the same time, he seemed to still be angling for a job in his chosen field.
Appearing to think we could bounce him out of prison, he offered to help the Americans now to fight ISIS.
He had made a similar egotistic offer to the Peshmerga and also to others who had handled him following his capture.

Ahmed’s story serves to demonstrate ISIS’ horrifying ambitions and tryst with chemical and biological weapons in Iraq and Syria, nearly actualized through their power to attract scientists like him from around the globe.

These experts are capable of researching methods for and carrying out the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction from raw substances and materials that ISIS also appears adept at procuring.

The notion that ISIS and its operatives can deploy weapons of mass destruction outside of Syria and Iraq still remains far-fetched, but even if Ahmed is overstating his abilities by a considerable margin, there is no question that the Caliphate had a substantial group of capable scientists, engineers and technicians.

ISIS’ capacity for innovation and the ability to replicate itself elsewhere—that is, engage in transfer of tools and techniques learned abroad for use in Europe, Asia or the Americas—must be taken seriously.

The Islamic State may have lost every last acre of the Caliphate in Iraq and Syria, but it lives on in the the minds of many who would inflict terrible attacks on its enemies, and may yet acquire the means to do so.



####
document number 2: 
US developing bioweapons in secret lab in Georgia: Russia



Russia has called on the United States to explain experiments with biological and chemical weapons in Georgia, with various Russian officials warning Washington that Moscow won’t tolerate such trials near its borders.

Major General Igor Kirillov, Chief of Russia’s Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Protection Troops, revealed during an interview with the state news agency TASS on Thursday that the US was running a secret chemical weapons lab at the Richard Lugar Public Health Research Center, located in the Georgian settlement of Alekseyevka.

"It raises a question - ‘Why such documents are stored at the Lugar Public Health Research Center?’
We expect a clear-cut answer to this question from the Georgian and American sides," Kirillov said.

He said a list of patents showed the US had developed various types of munitions intended for delivering chemical and biological agents.

According to these patents, the munitions had "low destruction cost" and didn’t "need to contact with enemy manpower."

"This corresponds to the concept of ‘non-contact warfare,’ the United States is implementing," he said, referring to the evolving military concept of fighting wars while ensuring minimum physical contact of own forces.

Kirillov said the patents indicated possible plans by the US military to develop specific capsules that could be filled with poisonous, radioactive, narcotic substances as well as with infectious disease pathogens.

"These munitions are not related to the list of conventional armaments and humane tools of warfare, while the publication of this information contradicts international accords on the prohibition of biological weapons," Kirillov added.

The official said the Georgia center was part of a network of such weapons labs the US had established near the borders of Russia and China.

Kirillov went on to accuse the US of testing deadly drugs and highly lethal biological agents on patients at the Lugar Center under the guise of medical research.

In one case, he said, over 70 people lost their lives after they were given the drug Solvadi, manufactured by the US-based Gilead Sciences, in which former US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld is a key shareholder.

"Even during widespread epidemics at in-patient infection clinics, such a large number of lethal cases has never been recorded," the general said.
He said the same medication was approved by Russia and "not a single lethal case was recorded during its clinical testing."

Vladimir Shamanov, the Head of Russia’s State Duma (Lower House of Parliament) Defense Committee, said Moscow was going to take all the necessary political and military steps in response to the experiments.

"We cannot just turn a blind eye, knowing that something, which directly affects security on the southern borders, is happening there.
We will take diplomatic and military measures," he confirmed.

Vladimir Yermakov, Director of the Russian Foreign Ministry’s Non-Proliferation and Arms Control Department, took a similar line, telling reporters that Moscow had already raised the issue with Washington.

"We told [the Americans] that we won’t let your military biologists do something strange on the Russian border," Yermakov said.

ME

Tags



####
document number 3: 
US government shuts down military lab studying Ebola and plague over fears deadly bugs are escaping via wastewater


The US government has shut down all research at the nation's top biological warfare lab amid fears deadly microbes could leak into the water supply.

Scientists at Fort Detrick, Maryland, study Ebola, the plague (caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis) and rabbit fever (caused by the bacterium tularemia).

But last month US health officials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sent a cease-and-desist order citing concerns that the lab does not have 'sufficient systems in place to decontaminate wastewater.'

Caree Vander Linden, spokesperson for the center, said research is 'on hold' and may be suspended for months.

It comes just weeks after uproar over a new book on Lyme disease, Bitten, which suggested the tick-borne illness, now plaguing the US, was unwittingly unleashed on Americans by biological warfare researchers at Fort Detrick decades ago.


The cease-and-desist notice automatically terminated the center's registration with the Federal Select Agent Program, which grants special permission for the study and possession disease-causing materials.

In order to get re-approved, the center will have to improve its decontamination processes.

Regulators also took issue with the lack of periodic re-training of staff who are handling the dangerous bacteria.

According to the local paper, the Frederick News Post, which first reported the cease-and-desist notice, Fort Detrick has been struggling to improve its decontamination processes since a flooding issue in May last year.

Fort Detrick was one of just a few places in the US approved to study Ebola amid the fresh outbreak in sub-Saharan Africa.

Ebola, Yersinia pestis and tularemia are all classed as Tier 1 Agents, meaning they pose a severe threat to the public.

Yersinia pestis, more commonly known as the plague, was the cause of some of the world's deadliest pandemics, including the Justinian Plague, the Black Death, and the major epidemics that swept through China in the late 1800s.

The disease continues to affect populations around the world today.

Tularemia is a rare infectious disease that can infect animals and people, and can be transmitted by ticks.
Rates of infection are on the rise, as with all tick-borne illnesses.



####
document number 4: 
Revisiting Aum Shinrikyo: New Insights into the Most Extensive Non-State Biological Weapons Program to Date


Introduction [1]

Among the chilling details unearthed in the manifesto of Norwegian domestic terrorist Anders Behring Breivik were passages advocating the use of biological weapons and especially

Bacillus anthracis

, the bacterium that causes anthrax.
Most commentators rightly downplayed the issue, since no evidence has emerged that Breivik obtained the bacterium or the capability to produce and disseminate it.
[2] At the same time, Breivik’s manifesto is yet another data point highlighting the appeal that biological weapons generally, and

B. anthracis

in particular, have to extremist groups and individuals seeking to cause mass casualties.

The most extensive non-state biological weapons program unearthed to date was organized in the 1990s by the Japanese Aum Shinrikyo cult.
[3] Together with the 2001 letters containing

B. anthracis

mailed to the media and U.S. Congress, it is one of only two known non-state efforts to try to manufacture and disseminate aerosolized biological weapons or

B. anthracis

.
Especially with so few cases on which to base analysis, Aum provides a key data point for assessing bioterrorism risks.
But while much has been written about the group, most analysis has focused either on its successful chemical weapons attacks or the cult’s bizarre characteristics more generally.
Aum’s failed biological weapons program has received far less attention, presumably in part because of a paucity of information.
[4]

A recent report based on extensive interviews with key cult members, including some imprisoned and on death row in Japan, sheds new light on Aum’s biological weapons-related activities.
The research effort that culminated in the publication of

Aum Shinrikyo: Insights Into How Terrorists Develop Biological and Chemical Weapons

was spearheaded by Richard Danzig, who served as Secretary of the Navy in the Clinton administration, and is a longtime advocate in Washington’s inner sanctums of more robust efforts to counter bioterrorism.
[5] For full disclosure, this author worked on the early stages of the multi-year research effort that culminated in the report, though not the drafting of the final paper.
The following draws on that work generally and the recently released report specifically.

Prior to the Danzig et al.
study, key cult members had apparently never been debriefed in any detail about their biological weapons program.
Japanese authorities were more interested in the chemical weapons program, because it produced casualties, than the biological weapons program that appears to have failed.
It is unclear whether outside analysts had previously tried to gain access to imprisoned cult members, which would have required the cooperation of the Japanese government.

Newly available information about Aum’s biological weapons efforts provides grounds for both comfort and concern.
The group grappled with challenges that will confront many non-state actors that might hope to employ biological weapons.
Yet Aum’s struggles appear to have had as much to do with its often bungling approach as with the inherent challenges of deploying biological weapons, and future groups may navigate these challenges less ineptly.
The ways in which Aum failed, and the trade-offs it confronted, provide lessons for policymakers looking to disrupt the efforts of future non-state actors that aspire to wield biological weapons.

From Yoga, Massage, and Alternative Medicine to Catalyzing the Apocalypse

Aum Shinrikyo began as a peaceful group before gradually morphing into an apocalyptic millenarian cult.
The group evolved from a yoga studio founded in Tokyo in the mid-1980s by Chizuo Matsumoto (who later renamed himself Shoko Asahara), a semi-blind acupuncture, massage, and Chinese medicine practitioner.
[6] Aum drew members stifled by a lack of purpose and spirituality in their lives, an early core of whom became Asahara’s inner circle.

The group grew rapidly; by 1989, it comprised about 4,000 members, and by 1995, when the cult carried out the sarin gas attacks on the Tokyo subway and Asahara and other key cult members were consequently arrested, it had about 10,000 members in Japan.
[7] The cult controlled about two dozen properties in Japan and had foreign offices in the United States, Germany, and Russia.
[8]

As early as 1985, Asahara predicted a coming apocalypse and identified himself and his acolytes as key to averting it.
Over time, this prediction morphed into a belief that the apocalypse was inevitable but cult members alone would survive it, and finally that the cult should hasten the apocalypse by launching attacks, including with biological weapons.
[9]

The group’s descent into violence was gradual.
In late 1988, a follower accidentally drowned during ritual exercises, and fearing attention from authorities Asahara ordered his corpse burned and remains disposed of surreptitiously.
When the deceased’s best friend became disillusioned with the cult and attempted to leave it early the following year, he was killed.
A few months after that, Asahara ordered the killing of a lawyer representing families of cult members, and cult members also killed the lawyer’s wife and one-year-old son.
[10]

One striking aspect of the Aum case is that roughly a dozen members of the inner circle personally carried out various criminal acts, including assassinations and the dissemination of biological and chemical agents.
Cult rank-and-file appear to have assisted, likely often unknowingly, for example by staffing chemical and biological weapons production facilities, but appear not to have been directly involved in carrying out attacks.
For members of the inner circle, crossing lesser thresholds to illegal action and violence appears to have reduced inhibitions to carrying out subsequent, more transgressive acts, and also made it difficult for members to contemplate leaving, since they were criminally implicated.

The trigger for the cult’s shift from apocalypse survival to apocalypse initiation appears to have been its unsuccessful attempt to compete in Japan’s 1990 parliamentary elections, on which it spent millions of dollars but garnered only a token number of votes.
[11] The group’s efforts to develop apocalypse-hastening weapons melded science and science fiction; members were fascinated by futuristic weapons concepts such as plasma guns that could atomize human bodies or mirrors several miles across that would float in space and reflect the sun’s rays.
[12] Several cult members visited the archive of Nicolai Tesla in Serbia to research his writings about earthquake-generating machines.
[13] The cult purchased land in Australia with the intention of prospecting for uranium to build nuclear weapons.
[14] And Aum purchased military hardware from the former Soviet Union, including AK-47 assault rifles, production equipment to manufacture its own versions in Japan, and a surplus MI-17 military transport helicopter, although its procurement efforts—like its later biological weapons efforts—were characterized by short attention spans and short shrift to technical challenges.
[15]

While some of Aum’s efforts are best characterized as science fiction, the cult’s pursuit of chemical and biological weapons was substantially grounded in science.
Chemical weapons were pursued in parallel with and ultimately as a substitute for failed biological weapons efforts.
The cult reportedly manufactured small quantities of phosgene, hydrogen cyanide, soman, GF and VX nerve agents, and attempted to employ some of these in targeted assassinations, consistently without success.
[16] It produced and disseminated larger quantities of sarin, with which it was able to kill and injure on several occasions.
[17] Although Aum apparently dabbled with a variety of biological agents, it only seriously attempted to obtain and disseminate two, botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT), obtained from the bacterium

Clostridium botulinum

, and

B. anthracis

.
The focus of this brief is Aum’s biological weapons efforts, which have received relatively little attention to date and on which the Danzig et al.
study sheds more new light.

Botulinum Neurotoxin: Trying to Deploy the Most Potent Poison

After deciding that the lawyer representing cult members’ families should be killed, Asahara asked his disciples what the most potent poison was, and one replied, "botulinum."
Although not employed to assassinate the lawyer, after the humiliating 1990 electoral defeat Asahara ordered the toxin’s acquisition.
[18]

As with

B. anthracis

, the cult chose not to try to obtain

C. botulinum

from legitimate culture collections, presumably fearing such a mode of acquisition could be traced back to Aum following any attacks.
[19] Instead, cult members gathered soil from an area known to contain the bacterium with the intention of culturing it.
[20] The cult may also have obtained material from a South American culture collection.
[21] One key cult member recalls the group worked with at least five distinct strains of

C. botulinum

, suggesting that some effort was made to isolate

C. botulinum

from the thousands of other bacterial and fungal species a soil sample would contain, though no information sheds light on the methods by which the cult attempted this task.
[22] If no isolation was attempted, that would provide one clear explanation for the apparent abject failure of Aum’s

C. botulinum efforts

, since a soil sample would contain thousands of living bacterial and fungal species that would crowd out any desired

C. botulinum

the samples might have contained.

Cult members cultivated material in two very large, crude, homemade fermenters; whether these were capable of maintaining the anaerobic (oxygen-free) environment or temperatures required is unclear.
No efforts were made to purify the resulting yellow liquid, a mixture of growth media and bacteria.
According to a key cult member, at least some of the product was contaminated with

Bacillus [subtilis] natto

, an aerobic bacterium used in Japan to ferment soybeans, although how the contaminant was identified remains unclear.
[23] Enormous volumes of the yellow liquid were supposedly produced; based on data provided by interviewed cult members Danzig et al.
estimate total production at a remarkable 450 metric tons.
[24]

Given the challenges Aum faced and its crude approach, the cult’s efforts to produce BoNT unsurprisingly appear to have been unsuccessful.
Mice on which the yellow liquid was tested showed no toxic effects, and one cult member reportedly slipped into a fermenting tank and nearly drowned, but subsequently showed no signs of illness.
[25] In early 1990 the cult nonetheless disseminated large volumes of the liquid from trucks fitted with crude spray devices, deploying these in the vicinity of two U.S. Naval bases, the Narita airport, the Japanese Diet, the Imperial Palace, and the headquarters of a rival religious group.
[26] No one appears to have been affected (including cult members who accidentally exposed themselves during the dissemination process), and the efforts went unnoticed by legal authorities.

In fall 1990, three Aum leaders were arrested for fraudulently purchasing land for a new compound; unbeknownst to the police, chemical weapons production facilities were under construction on the new land.
According to a key cult member, the arrests were interpreted as a sign that a police raid was imminent, and Aum responded by dismantling its chemical and biological weapons facilities.
[27] In 1992 the cult reinvigorated its efforts with a new focus on

B. anthracis

, detailed below.
When these efforts failed to produce any casualties, in 1993 the group again attempted to produce BoNT and used small quantities of material it produced to unsuccessfully attack individuals and a subway station.
[28]

A variety of factors may have contributed to the failed BoNT efforts.
Several analysts have speculated that Aum may not have acquired a strain of

C. botulinum

capable of producing significant toxin.
[29] Available information suggests the cult may simply have cultured a soil sample without attempting to isolate

C. botulinum

, which would not have yielded meaningful quantities of toxin even if the sample had contained a toxin-producing strain alongside thousands of other organic contaminants.

Even if the group did acquire and isolate a toxigenic strain, conditions for appropriate anaerobic fermentation may not have been achieved.
Two cult members indicated the presence of bacterial contamination, and this would have interfered with the growth of

C. botulinum

.
[30] It is also possible that some toxin was successfully produced but degraded or destroyed during processing, storage, or dissemination, or that whatever toxin was present was too dilute to have an effect.
The most likely hypothesis remains that the cult failed to obtain or isolate the requisite bacteria.

Bacillus Anthracis: "Genetic Engineering" to Produce Lethality?

In 1992, Aum reinvigorated its biological weapons efforts in the context of more robust militarized interaction with the outside world, the trigger for which seems to have been leader Asahara’s whims rather than any particular external event.
[31] Efforts now focused on

B. anthracis

, the bacterium that causes anthrax.
As with the

C. botulinum

, Aum decided not to try to obtain material from a culture collection for fear the acquisition could be traced.
An unsuccessful effort was apparently made to steal a strain from a laboratory, after which a cult sympathizer provided access to a vaccine strain of the material, although the details remain murky.
[32]

Perhaps the most important puzzle on which the Danzig et al.
report sheds potential light is with its alternative theory about how the cult ended up with a vaccine strain of

B. anthracis

.
The conventional wisdom is that this represented bungling, possibly as simple as a clerical error when ordering material from a culture collection.
Others have suggested that the anthrax dissemination was only intended as a trial run, or that the effort was sabotaged.
[33] Danzig et al.
advance a plausible, if still speculative, alternative explanation.

The cult member in charge of biological weapons efforts had completed undergraduate studies in agricultural and veterinary medicine at a university with a substantial anthrax collection, including both Sterne and Pasteur vaccine strains, before going on to PhD studies in virology.
[34] Danzig et al.
speculate that a contact at his old university provided him with

B. anthracis

, a supposition supported by new analysis of the samples gathered by the Japanese police, which suggest that the cult’s material closely matched the particular strain of Sterne held by the university.
[35]

Two key cult members indicated that Aum members working on the project were aware they had a vaccine strain but planned to use "genetic engineering" to convert it to a more lethal form.
While other analysts have dismissed this as more science fiction than science, Danzig et al.
speculate that the cult may have obtained both Sterne and Pasteur strains and sought to combine them to produce a virulent strain.
[36] It turns out that Russian scientists had published a paper detailing such an effort in 1989, and scientists at the Japanese agricultural and veterinary university had been working on the technique around the same time.
[37] It bears emphasizing that no concrete evidence suggests the cult obtained a Pasteur strain, and even if it had, employing Sterne and Pasteur strains to create a virulent pathogen is a challenging task almost certainly beyond cult members’ capabilities.

As with BoNT, in 1993 the cult began attempting to mass produce

B. anthracis

without evidence that it had successfully obtained a pathogenic strain.
Material was prepared in crude drum fermenters.
No efforts were made to purify the 10-20 metric tons of liquid slurry produced, which was dispersed using a homemade sprayer, first from the roof of a cult building located in a residential neighborhood and later from a modified truck.

In the former case, some birds and neighborhood pets were apparently killed, though whether by the substance released remains unclear.
Neighbors complained of the foul odor and gelatinous substance that rained down in the building’s vicinity, leading the police to visit and gather samples, but these were not tested until after the 1995 sarin subway attacks.
[38] After attacks with liquid slurry failed to produce any casualties, the group began to employ crude drying devices to produce a powder, an unknown quantity of which was disseminated by truck in Tokyo.
[39]

Although some neighborhood birds may have perished, it appears no humans were harmed as a result of Aum’s

B. anthracis

efforts.
In fact, multiple cult members apparently inadvertently inhaled the material produced and subsequently reported no ill effects.
[40] As with BoNT, a variety of factors appear to explain Aum’s lack of success.
If the cult was indeed attempting to produce a virulent strain of B. anthracis using two vaccine strains, this remarkably ambitious effort unsurprisingly failed.
Even in the unlikely event that the effort had been successful, the resulting strain might not have been sufficiently robust for subsequent production, storage, and dissemination.
In the even more unlikely event that Aum had produced and successfully stored volumes of a virulent strain, it is possible that poor dissemination capabilities might have damaged the material or failed to aerosolize it so that sufficient quantities could be inhaled.
For example, the cult employed a homemade nozzle that reportedly spouted rather than sprayed and dispersed material during the day, exposing it to UV radiation and thermal updrafts that would have reduced concentrations at ground level.
[41] But the most plausible hypothesis remains that Aum failed to obtain a virulent strain of

B. anthracis

.

Learning from Aum’s Failed Efforts

Especially in light of the paucity of bioterrorism cases, Aum’s failed efforts to deploy effective biological weapons are a rich data point for assessing the threat and identifying policies to ameliorate it.
Every case has its idiosyncrasies, and perhaps none quite so much as Aum, which really was "stranger than fiction."
But with that caveat in mind, the case does suggest three generalizations about the bioterrorism threat.

Putting the bioterrorism threat in perspective

Cult leader Asahara took a key lesson from his acolytes’ repeated failures to mount an effective biological weapons attack: American hyping of the bioterrorism threat was intended to mislead groups like his into pursuing this unproductive path in lieu of other, potentially more effective weapons.
[42] Although to this observer it appears unlikely Washington’s public diplomacy efforts are quite so crafty (at least not intentionally so), Aum’s struggles do suggest that successful bioterrorism is more challenging than it is often portrayed.

Generalizations from one case should be taken with a grain of salt, all the more so when the case is as idiosyncratic as this one.
But the cult brought to bear both some degree of relevant expertise and very substantial resources.
The head of the biological weapons program had completed undergraduate studies in agricultural and veterinary medicine and conducted PhD studies in virology, albeit was not a microbiologist and lacked tacit knowledge regarding working with bacteria.
[43] Another senior member was a medical doctor.
As for resources, the cult possessed and was willing to spend millions of dollars on its unconventional weapons programs and constructed substantial infrastructure to support it.

The Aum case particularly highlights the importance of specialized, tacit knowledge to be able to isolate, manipulate, cultivate, and sustain living organisms, somewhat in contrast to chemical weapons development efforts.
[44] The cult’s failure to successfully deploy biological weapons appears to be over determined.
Whatever the causes of its failures—and these remain somewhat ambiguous—it appears that plenty of others stood between the cult and a successful bioterrorism attack.
For example, the cult appears to have failed to obtain a pathogenic strain of

B. anthracis

or a toxigenic strain of

C. botulinum

.
But had it succeeded, it appears likely the cult would have struggled to cultivate those strains.
Had it overcome that hurdle, cult members would almost certainly have exposed themselves during the production and dissemination process.
Had they avoided those hurdles, Aum’s crude production and dissemination techniques would have meant that few if any non-cult members would have been sickened by the crudely disseminated slurry, even if it had contained BoNT or a virulent strain of

B. anthracis

.

Effective dispersal is a significant hurdle

Discussions of bioterrorism tend to focus on the possibility that individuals or groups might obtain agents they could use to conduct attacks, but often give short shrift to how readily such agents could be disseminated if they were obtained.
The evidence suggests that Aum likely failed to obtain potent agents, and that its struggles to distribute what it did obtain effectively are therefore not necessary to explaining its failure to cause harm via biological weapons.

Nonetheless, Aum’s struggles to effectively disseminate the material it produced highlight an important finding.
Obtaining agents is likely the greatest hurdle to successful bioterrorism, but disseminating them to cause large numbers of casualties, and simultaneously avoiding exposure of those doing the disseminating, is a non-trivial secondary challenge that popular discussions of bioterrorism often overlook.

Where there is smoke, there may later be fire

Aum’s efforts were characterized by steadily escalating levels of attempted violence, a relatively seamless transition from individual to mass attacks, and from conventional to unconventional weapons, and a trial-and-error process of repeated errors but persistence and attempts at correction in the face of failure.

Like other non-state groups, Aum engaged in steadily escalating levels of illegal action and violence.
The group began with the illegal disposal of the body of a cult member who had been accidentally killed and escalated to attacks on individuals perceived to be antagonistic to the cult and ultimately the general populace.
Initial transgressions appear to have cemented group affiliation, emboldened cult members and especially the leader Asahara, and made it difficult for members to back out as violence escalated.

One striking element of the case is the relatively seamless transition from individual to mass attacks, and from more to less conventional ones, (i.e., from killing a lapsed cult member by strangling him with a rope to attempting to expose large populations to BoNT and

B. anthracis

).
Normative inhibitions appear to have played little role, although it is hard to know how far that can be generalized beyond the case.

Relatedly, the cult was not dissuaded by repeated failures, and it was emboldened at the lack of consequences for its earlier actions.
This suggests that where there is smoke there may be fire, in other words, failed attacks may be harbingers of future, and potentially more successful, ones.
The pattern of trial, error, and potential later success also provides support for a "broken windows" theory of counterterrorism: responding robustly to more modest initial transgressions may make subsequent greater transgressions less likely.
[45]

Sources: [1] Philipp C.
Bleek is assistant professor of Nonproliferation and Terrorism Studies in the Graduate School of International Policy and Management at the Monterey Institute of International Studies, a Graduate School of Middlebury College, and fellow at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies.
He thanks Richard Danzig, Jessica Varnum, and Ray Zilinskas for helpful comments on earlier drafts.
[2] One striking thing about Breivik’s manifesto is the sobriety of its analysis of anthrax, especially given the author’s apparent lack of relevant expertise.
However, since much of the manuscript was plagiarized from various sources, whether Breivik deserves much credit for the analysis is debatable.
"Theoretically," the manifesto says (in this case channeling Wikipedia), "anthrax spores can be cultivated with minimal special equipment and less than a first-year collegiate microbiological education."
But in practice, the document notes, the procedure "is difficult and dangerous."
Andrew Berwick (pseudonym),

2083: A European Declaration of Independence

(self-published, 2011), accessed November 4, 2011 at https://www.kevinislaughter.com/wp-content/uploads/2083+-+A+European+Declaration+of+Independence.pdf, pp.
952-954, 957, 959, 961-965.
[3] As William Rosenau notes, "Aum is the only example of a terrorist group that has attempted to carry out mass murder with biological toxins and human pathogens.
Other terrorists have attempted to acquire human pathogens, and one religious cult has succeeded in poisoning food with dangerous bacteria.
But to date only Aum has attempted to create and use bioweapons on a large scale.
In short, Aum is an important source of empirical information on sophisticated terrorist efforts to acquire these weapons."
William Rosenau, "Aum Shinrikyo’s Biological Weapons Program: Why Did It Fail?"

Studies in Conflict and Terrorism

Volume 24, Number 4 (2001), p.
290.
[4] John Parachini wrote in 2005, "Aum’s research about biological weapons remains remarkably obscure in official, journalistic, and scholarly accounts…These activities warrant considerably more thorough examination than they have received thus far."
John Parachini, "Aum Shinrikyo," in Brian Jackson et al.,

Aptitude for Destruction, Volume 2: Case Studies of Organizational Learning in Five Terrorist Groups

(Santa Monica, CA: RAND, 2005), p.
19.
[5] Richard Danzig et al.,

Aum Shinrikyo: Insights Into How Terrorists Develop Biological and Chemical Weapons

(Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, 2011).
Danzig’s prior work on the topic includes Richard J.
Danzig, Rachel Kleinfeld, and Philipp C.
Bleek, After an Attack: Preparing Citizens for Bioterrorism (Washington, DC: Center for a New American Security, 2007); Richard J.
Danzig, A Policymaker’s Guide to Bioterrorism and What to Do About It (Washington, DC: National Defense University, 2009); Richard Danzig, Catastrophic Bioterrorism: What Is To Be Done?
(Washington, DC: National Defense University, 2003).
Subsequent references to "Danzig et al."
refer to the Aum Shinrikyo report.
[6] Aum appears to refer to the "ohm" sound yoga practitioners make; Asahara (then Matsumoto) called his yoga school Aum, Inc.
Shinrikyo means teaching of truth.
An earlier iteration of the group was called Aum Shinsen no Kai, or Aum Mountain Hermit’s Society, based on a prophecy that survivors of the coming apocalypse would be benevolent

shinsen

, or mountain hermits.
Ian Reader,

Religious Violence in Contemporary Japan: The Case of Aum Shinrikyo

(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2000), p.
89.
[7] Reader, pp.
63, 92.
Only a modest fraction of these were "monks" or "nuns" who had fully rejected all ties to the outside world.
The group also attempted to open branches in Germany, the United States, and Sri Lanka, and was apparently most successful in Russia, where it attracted approximately tens of thousands of followers after Asahara visited the country with several hundred Japanese members on a "Salvation Tour," including "spectacular" events and considerable radio and television advertising.
Parachini, pp.
29-31.
[8] Appendix C: Aum Shinrikyo Facilities in

Global Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Case Study on the Aum Shinrikyo

Senate Government Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, October 31, 1995, accessed November 4, 2011 at www.fas.org/irp/congress/1995_rpt/aum/index.html.
[9] Reader, pp.
88-93.
Although the cult’s often-inept violence attracted police attention, a combination of equally-inept policing and strict laws protecting religious organizations allowed it to act with relative impunity.
[10] Reader pp.
143-145, 148-151; Danzig et al., pp.
9, 12, 14.
[11] Reader, pp.
148, 153-158.
[12] Reader, p.
180.
[13] Robert Jay Lifton,

Destroying the World to Save It: Aum Shinrikyo, Apocalytic Violence, and the New Global Terrorism

(New York: Metropolitan Books, 1999), pp.
119-120.
One can imagine the elderly archivist’s bafflement at the strange Japanese visitors who spent day after day digging through the archives for earthquake generation-related material.
[14] Parachini, p. 23 [15] Parachini, p. 26; Reader, p. 217; Lifton, p.
181.
[16] Danzig et al., p.
29.
[17] The Danzig et al.
study also includes a rich account of Aum’s chemical weapons efforts with some new details about the cult’s activities, including the most thorough discussion of the cult’s crude but effective sarin dissemination techniques published to date.
[18] Danzig et al., p.
16.
[19] Since the cult operated a hospital, it could plausibly have obtained the bacterium from a commercial culture collection.
[20] What was gathered remains unclear, but a key cult member told Danzig et al.
that the cult worked on at least five strains or variants of C. butulinum, although some material may later have been obtained from a South American culture collection.
How the cult isolated and identified the strains on which it supposedly worked remains unclear.
Danzig et al., p.
16.
[21] The Danzig et al.
study notes this possibility but does not attribute it to a source; see endnote 68, p.
54.
[22] Danzig et al, p.
16.
[23] Danzig et al., p.
17.
[24] A key cult member described to Danzig et al.
two or three cube-shaped steel boxes, with dimensions of 2 x 2 x 2.5 meters, used as fermenters, and approximately 50 batches of yellow liquid produced.
The total volume supposedly produced would be sufficient to fill dozens of full-size fertilizer transport trucks, suggesting that perhaps the cult member’s recollections should be taken with a grain of salt.
That said, Aum had both very substantial financial resources (a study by the U.S. Senate Government Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations estimated Aum’s total resources in 1995 at more than $1 billion), and the land and manpower for substantial facilities.

Global Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Case Study on the Aum Shinrikyo

, Senate Government Affairs Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, October 31, 1995, accessed November 4, 2011 at www.fas.org/irp/congress/1995_rpt/aum/index.html.
[25] Mice were apparently injected with the yellow liquid; whether ingestion and aerosol inhalation were also employed is unclear.
There appears to have been some uncertainty about whether some mice were affected; some did die, but it was unclear whether this was linked to the administration of the botulinum.
Danzig, p. 16 and endnote 76, pp.
54-55.
[26] Danzig et al., p.
17.
[27] Danzig et al., pp.
17, 20.
[28] Danzig et al., p.
21.
[29] W. Seth Carus,

Bioterrorism and Biocrimes: The Illicit Use of Biological Agents Since 1990

(National Defense University, 2002), p. 50; Gregory D. Koblentz,

Living Weapons: Biological Warfare and International Security

(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), p. 213; Milton Leitenberg,

Assessing the Biological Weapons and Bioterrorism Threat

(U.S. Army War College, 2005), p.
60.
[30] Danzig et al., p.
17.
[31] Danzig et al, pp.
20-21.
[32] Some of the uncertainty stems from the fact that the individual in charge of the cult’s biological weapons efforts declined interview requests from Danzig et al., and other key cult members disclaim knowledge of his bacillus anthracis source(s).
Danzig et al., pp.
21, 23.
[33] Parachini, p.
21.
[34] Unfortunately, the cult member in charge of the biological weapons program declined to meet with Danzig and his colleagues.
[35] Paul Keim, who with colleagues had analyzed a sample from Aum’s 1993 attempted

B. anthracis

attack and identified it as a benign Sterne vaccine strain, conducted further analysis in 2010 in response to a request from Danzig et al.
and determined that, "The genome sequence was extremely similar not just to Sterne but specifically to the 34F2 strain then available at Obihiro," the university where the cult member in charge of the biological weapons program had conducted his undergraduate studies.
Danzig et al., p.
23.
[36] Virulent

B. anthracis

possesses two plasmids, while the Sterne and Pasteur strains each possess only one of the two and can consequently stimulate immune reactions without being lethal.
The two strains can be employed to yield virulent bacteria via either cell-to-cell "mating" (conjugation), or the use of a virus that infects bacteria (transduction).
The technique is challenging and likely beyond the abilities of Aum’s members, but Danzig et al.
’s speculation that it was being attempted finds considerable support from the accounts of cult members and other information.
Danzig et al, pp.
23-25.
[37] The speculation is further reinforced by the recollection of one key cult member that a microscope was used to confirm success in transforming the vaccine strain to a more virulent one.
The second plasmid found on a virulent anthrax strain generates a capsule that can be viewed after staining under a light microscope.
Danzig et al, p.
24.
The Russian paper cited is A.S. Stepanov, "Transduction and Conjugation Transfer of the pX02 Plasmid in

Bacillus anthracis

"

Molekuliarnaia Genetika, Mikrobiologia, I Virusologia

12 (1989), pp.
39-43.
[38] Raymond A. Zilinskas, Biological Warfare: Modern Offense and Defense (Lynne Rienner, 2000), p. 81; Lifton, p. 188; Danzig, p.
25.
[39] Danzig et al., p.
25.
[40] Danzig et al., p.
25.
[41] Gregory D. Koblentz,

Living Weapons: Biological Warfare and International Security

(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2011), p.
213.
[42] Danzig et al., p. 26, based on Danzig interview with Fumihiro Joyu, April 21, 2008.
One can imagine Al Qaeda operatives similarly grumbling about chemical, biological, and especially nuclear terrorism risk assessments; the online humor magazine

The Onion

nicely captured that scenario in a story headlined "Terrorist Has No Idea What To Do With All This Plutonium" a few years ago.
November 30, 2005, accessed October 2, 2011 at www.theonion.com/articles/terrorist-has-no-idea-what-to-do-with-all-this-plu,1847/.
[43] Tacit knowledge is knowledge that cannot be conveyed in words or symbols, but must be learned by doing, often through a process of trial-and-error.
A paradigmatic example is learning to write a bicycle; a textbook on bicycle-riding would presumably be of little use to mastering the core skill of balancing while operating the bicycle.
[44] Successfully mounting a

B. anthracis

attack requires skills associated with obtaining, growing, processing, sporulating, drying, pulverizing, testing, and disseminating, posing major challenges even for those trained as, for example, medical doctors or veterinarians.
[45] The "broken windows" strategy of policing was first articulated by James Q.
Wilson and George L. Kelling in a 1982 article in the

Atlantic Monthly

, in which they suggested that not fixing broken windows would encourage greater transgressions.
The approach was famously implemented in New York in the early 1990s, first by the head of the city’s Transit Police, William Bratton, and then by Major Rudy Giuliani and his police commissioner, Howard Safir.
As implemented in New York, one notable example of "broken windows" were the "squeegee men" who cleaned car windshields at intersections and then demanded payment.
James Q.
Wilson and George L. Kelling, "Broken Windows: The Police and Neighborhood Safety"

The Atlantic Magazine

(March 1982), accessed November 4, 2011 at https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1982/03/broken-windows/4465/.

In light of newly available information, Philipp Bleek analyzes Aum Shinrikyo's biological weapons efforts and uses the cult's failed attempts as a tool to assess the threat of bioterrorism and possible preventative measures.



####
document number 5: 
Ricin suspect 'in al Qaeda camp'




A policeman guards the north London flat above a pharmacy where traces of deadly ricin were found.





LONDON, England (CNN) -- One of seven men arrested in London in a ricin poison investigation had trained in an al Qaeda terrorist camp in Afghanistan, a source told CNN.

Acting on a tip from French intelligence sources, British anti-terror investigators arrested six Algerian men on Sunday in a flat in the Wood Green section of north London.

The flat was found to contain traces of the highly potent poison ricin and crude facilities to make it.

A seventh man, said to be 33 years old, was arrested on Tuesday in north London.

The men have been in Britain no more than three months, sources have told CNN.
They said the men -- who ranged in age from the teens to the 30s -- may have been connected to others involved in earlier reconnaissance missions.

In addition, European intelligence sources said at least two of the six arrested Sunday had traveled through Paris.
They are believed to be linked to a group of four people arrested in Paris in December.

French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy said that during a December raid in the northern Paris suburb of La Courneuve, anti-espionage agents seized two vials of unidentified chemicals, as well as a protective suit for use against chemical or biological arms.

British authorities said they are concerned more ricin could have been produced in the flat where the Algerians were arrested and that the poison might be in the hands of other people.

Police also fear there could be others at large who were working with the men.

Numerous references to making ricin were in documents produced by the al Qaeda terrorist network.
References to ricin were part of the group's training course and in a manual that was spread worldwide.

Iraq is also known to have included ricin in its biological weapons program.

After the initial arrests the British government urged citizens to be "alert but not alarmed."

Doctors around Britain were warned to look for symptoms of exposure to ricin, one of the most powerful poisons and one for which there is no antidote.

If inhaled, ricin can cause death in 36 to 48 hours from failure of the respiratory and circulatory systems.
If ingested, it causes nausea, vomiting and internal bleeding of the stomach and intestines, followed by failure of the liver, spleen and kidneys, and death by collapse of the circulatory system.

If injected, ricin immediately kills the muscles and lymph nodes near the site of the injection.
Failure of the major organs and death usually follows.

Medical experts point out that although ricin is powerful, it cannot easily be used to affect a large number of people, as anthrax can.

To equal one kilogram of anthrax, four metric tons of ricin would be needed.
On the other hand, anthrax can be treated if caught early enough.

Ricin can be made from the castor bean plant.
One milligram of it can kill an adult.

-- CNN Senior International Correspondent Sheila MacVicar contributed to this report



####
document number 6: 
Our Adoption Experience



We were already blessed with three beautiful biological daughters, and my wife and I were talking about trying again for a boy.
After becoming engaged years earlier, we had talked about having a family.
We also discussed what we would do if we were physically unable to have children.
We both had agreed that if that happened, we would try to adopt.
Since twins ran in my wife’s side of the family, we discussed the possibility of my wife not only having another girl, but possibly twin girls!
I thought for a moment, and jokingly said to my wife, "Possibly six women in the family, and me the ONLY guy!
I would have to make an appointment to use the bathroom for sure!"

On a serious note, I then mentioned how we had talked about adopting years earlier, and asked what she thought of adopting a boy now.
She smiled at me and said, "I had thought of that, also."
After researching domestic adoption and international adoption, we mentioned to our daughter’s first grade teacher that we intended to adopt a boy.
She was a former foster parent and asked if we had considered adopting from the State of Massachusetts Department of Social Services.
I had no knowledge of an adoption program run by the state, and my and I agreed to have coffee with her and a friend of hers who was involved with the state adoption program before spending $24,000+ for a domestic or international adoption.

We discussed the pros and cons of domestic adoption, adoption overseas, and adoption through the state.
We were then offered, at no obligation, a free parenting course and figured it could only help with our current parental skills.
After passing the course, which was quite informative and valuable, we were asked if we were still interested in becoming foster/adoptive parents through the state.
We said yes, and once we passed a background check and other departmental requirements, we were placed on a waiting list.
All through this process there was no pressure, and we were assured there was no obligation until we were matched and offered a child.

Then the time finally arrived!
We received a call asking if we would be interested in fostering/adopting a baby boy.
We met with the appropriate personnel, had a disclosure meeting, which involved learning about the child’s and parent’s history/medical condition(s), and the reason the child was in state foster care.
We agreed and asked how much this would cost us?
We were both shocked and overjoyed when we were told that it would cost "absolutely nothing!"

We were told to meet a social worker at the hospital to pick up the baby, who was only 3 days old and still in the hospital nursery.
When we were told the name of the hospital, we were again shocked.
It was the hospital where my wife worked.
Not only did she work at that hospital, but she worked in the maternity unit there.
The social worker couldn’t believe it either.
What a coincidence!
We arrived at the hospital maternity unit, and immediately my wife’s co-workers were wondering why she was there on her day off.
When we explained what was happening, they just couldn’t believe it.
When the social worker pointed out the child to us in the nursery, my wife started to cry, and said she had seen the baby the night before, while she was working, and thought he was absolutely adorable!
We became his foster/pre-adoptive parents, and approximately one year later, we legally adopted him.

About one year later, just weeks before Thanksgiving, we received a call from the Dept.
of Social Services Adoption Unit.
They advised us that the same biological parents of our adopted son had another baby girl, who had been placed into state custody months earlier.
When the mother had given birth, she used a false identity in attempt to try to keep the baby, since all of her previous children had been removed by the state because the mother used drugs/alcohol during the pregnancies.
Allegedly, the mom and all the babies tested positive for drugs/alcohol after the births.
Usually the state would call adoptive parents of a sibling, in an attempt to keep siblings together.
Since the mom used a false identity, the state didn’t realize what she had done till the new baby girl had been placed in the home of another foster/adoptive couple.

The reason they were calling us was because the foster/adoptive mother had just been involved in a severe car accident and had been air-lifted to a trauma center and was undergoing major surgery.
Her husband was out-of-state and could not be contacted.
The adoption unit asked if we would be willing to take care of their baby pending the outcome of the mother’s surgery and her husband’s return.
Since it was just before Thanksgiving and this was our son’s biological sister, how could we say no?
We agreed, and a social worker brought over the 4-month-old girl later that night.
The moment she looked at us, she gave us a big smile and put her arms out toward my wife as if to say, "Pick me up!"
She did not cry at all and was such a well behaved baby.

We received a call from the adoption unit about a week later and were told some devastating news.
The adoptive mother’s surgery was not a success, and due to her prognosis, she and her husband would not be able to go through with the adoption of our son’s sister.
The social worker then asked if we could continue to take care of the baby girl until they could find a new foster/adoptive family match for her.
I then asked her if we could adopt her so that the brother and sister could be together.
The social worker laughed and said "I was hoping you would ask.
I didn’t have the nerve to ask since you and your wife had been so nice to help us and the baby with such notice!"
I told her to start the paperwork since my wife and I would love to adopt her.
The baby girl stayed with us, and nine months later, we legally adopted her.
After all, how could we split up a brother and sister?
No way!

We are always asked if we would do it again, my wife and I always answer, "I would do it again in a heartbeat!"
If anyone tries to toss off the events as just being coincidental, we tell them the day that both children were given to us–All Saints’ Day!
It was not coincidence.
It was destiny.


Want to contact an adoption professional?


Love this?
Want more?

Sign up for our newsletter and never miss out on the best adoption content!



####
document number 7: 
Sharing my experience buying a home: this is what I learned (incentive, disclosure)


I closed on my first home purchase today in Washington DC.
I wanted to share my experience with others in the event that it can be helpful.

Overall, it went smoothly.
I purchased a co-op, which is sort of unique, but a lot of the stuff that I went through is applicable to any first time buyer.

Choosing an agent: I had a team.
I was fairly satisfied with them.
They were very responsive and knew the market extremely well.
Because they knew the market so well, there seemed to be two transactions going on-- one between me and the seller, and the other between my agents and the seller's agent.
At closing it was revealed that they got a bigger commission than the seller's agent.
In hindsight, they did steer me a little more vigorously to my property than some others, and the added commission I am sure was no small part of that.
I am happy with the place, so no harm done, but it seems like there is always something less than transparent in this sort of deal.
My transaction was also on the lower end of the type of properties they handle.

If I had it to do over, I would probably gone with someone a little less "connected" and exclusively buyer focused.
I had some bad experiences with agents that I interviewed in the beginning, so I just kind of signed on with them out of frustration.
I would probably do more legwork if I had to do this again.
I did like the team concept-- there was always someone to answer my questions.

Buying power: Honestly, I was approved for a lot more than I felt comfortable spending.
At first, I was looking at places at the top of my range.
Then I did a little math and realized that I was probably going to be happier spending less.
This meant looking at properties that might need some updates, which was fine with me as a lot of the "move in ready" places I viewed had finishes I was less than crazy about.

What I learned: This is a very personal choice-- I have had people say "Buy as much as you can afford!"
and others who are a lot more conservative.
In the end, I chose location over "done-ness" and am paying about $500 less per month than I was in rent.
But I could have easily gone the other way.
There is such an emotional component to buying a house, sometimes it trumps cost.
I ended up going with the place that felt the most "right".

Co-op vs Condo vs SFH: In my price range (550k and less) there are few options in the city for a SFH.
Those that exist have a ton of developer competition, multiple bids, and are often in "up and coming " neighborhoods.
I started my search thinking I wanted an SFH slightly outside of the city, but quickly decided against it when I reviewed the difference in property taxes, maintenance, and lifestyle/commute issues.
So I turned to condos.
Taxes are not included in condo fees in DC, and I quickly learned that "low fees" were not the whole story.
Because I wanted a historic building vs.
new construction, co-ops were also an option.
I did a ton of research on this form of ownership and found that it has both advantages and disadvantages, and that those vary greatly from building to building.
At first, I was intimidated by the whole Co-op Board review process, but having rented forever, I quickly understood that it wasn't that much different than an application process for a higher-end rental building.

My Board interview was actually what cemented my interest in the building.
It revealed a group of people who had really made the place a long term home, who were social, fun, and cared about their neighbors.
The condos I looked at in contrast seemed like filing cabinets for young professionals.
If I had it to do over: I would have considered co-ops earlier.
I had summarily dismissed them before doing my homework.

Making offers: My market is very competitive, especially in my price range.
Lots of properties have multiple offers and go above asking.
I made two offers.
The first one had multiple offers and I withdrew after the seller wasted a week of my time: he knew other offers might come in, so he held off responding to mine trying to get a bidding war started.
The second place dropped and dropped in price so I finally made an offer.

What I learned: I was loathe to get into an escalation game, so I backed out of my initial offer.
I feel good about that-- the place just closed and it went for well above asking.
In my opinion, it went for more than it was worth.
I was upset at first that I had come in at full price on my second offer, just because I had this mindset that coming in at full price was always foolish.
But in my market, full price is more often than not, the sales price.
I have been tracking lots of properties I looked at and there are very very few that come in even for $2000 less.
So I learned that though I am a cheapskate, the market often dictates how much of a cheapskate you can be.

Choosing a lender: With my co-op there were about ten lenders I could choose from (a co-op loan is slightly different from a condo loan).
I called all of them and met with a few before deciding.
I went with Wells Fargo, despite lots of bad internet press.
The rates from all were comparable-- some had higher fees, others had higher interest rates, but they all ended up being very competitive with one another.
My lender was AWESOME.
He never missed a call, walked me through the whole thing, and I saved money at closing due to his diligence.
My loan had zero issues.
I submitted pay stubs, W2s, an application and that was about it.
They ran credit and I was pretty much done.
No issues from the underwriters, no problems whatsoever.
We actually were able to close earlier than anticipated and it only took about a half hour with no surprises.
Even my agents were impressed.

My takeaway is that a good loan officer is very important-- as important as a good agent.
Not all are created equal.
Time spent researching here will pay off.

Down payment: What I learned was simply this: Put 20% or more if you can afford it.
Period.
None of this nonsense with mortgage insurance.
What a waste.
I never realized what a waste this was until I started this process so I didn't even mess with a lower down payment.
If I hadn't had the cash, I would have saved until I did and bought then.

Other stuff: I had some issues with non-disclosure which were unpleasant surprises.
I thought long and hard before I decided to move forward with the deal.
In the end, it still made financial sense, so I went ahead.
But you never know what will happen once I get into the place.

I also learned that applying for an FHA loan is a huge pain in the you-know-what.
I completely jettisoned any thought of that early on.

I looked at a ton of places and most of them looked a lot alike.
Uniqueness appealed to me as a buyer--frankly, if I never see another granite counter top or cherry cabinet, its way too soon.
Why do flippers think that everyone wants a place that looks the same?

I looked in the winter.
Inventory was low, but so were prices.
Another unit in my building went on the market last week for 40K more are is already under contract.
I definitely saved a bit by house hunting over the holiday season.

And, I am now addicted to looking at Redfin.
I need to stop.
I hear its normal to have buyer's remorse, and constantly checking out everything on the market now (especially since it has picked up since I was looking) will likely make that kick in.
Probably not a great idea, but its reinforced my decision so far.

Good luck to everyone out there who is buying!
Next stop will be moving, then renovations to kitchen and bath.




Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual I closed on my first home purchase today in Washington DC.



Congrats on your new home!
Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual . .
.
there seemed to be two transactions going on-- one between me and the seller, and the other between my agents and the seller's agent.
At closing it was revealed that they got a bigger commission than the seller's agent.
In hindsight, they did steer me a little more vigorously to my property than some others, and the added commission I am sure was no small part of that.
I am happy with the place, so no harm done, but it seems like there is always something less than transparent in this sort of deal.
My transaction was also on the lower end of the type of properties they handle.



Are you saying the commission your agent received was a higher percentage than most other properties were offering?
I know I often receive more commission than the listing agent, because some listing agents offer their clients a lower commission rate which they achieve by cutting their own end of the commission.
If you're going to offer a lower commission rate this is the smart way to do it as less scrupulous buyer's agents will steer their clients toward other properties if the co-broke fee you are offering is on the low end of the spectrum.



Quote:



Originally Posted by MikePRU Congrats on your new home!
Are you saying the commission your agent received was a higher percentage than most other properties were offering?
I know I often receive more commission than the listing agent, because some listing agents offer their clients a lower commission rate which they achieve by cutting their own end of the commission.
If you're going to offer a lower commission rate this is the smart way to do it as less scrupulous buyer's agents will steer their clients toward other properties if the co-broke fee you are offering is on the low end of the spectrum.

By my math, the seller's agent got 2% and my agents got 4%.
The normal split in my area is 3% each.
Of course, this is negotiable.


Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual By my math, the seller's agent got 2% and my agents got 4%.
The normal split in my area is 3% each.
Of course, this is negotiable.




Unfortunately, some agents do steer buyers towards homes that have higher commission rates, or agent bonuses.
How long was the home on the market for?
It's possible that the sellers are using the listing agent on another deal, and want to offload their home as quickly as possible.
If so, it worked.


Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual I closed on my first home purchase today in Washington DC.
I wanted to share my experience with others in the event that it can be helpful.
Overall, it went smoothly.
I purchased a co-op, which is sort of unique, but a lot of the stuff that I went through is applicable to any first time buyer.
Choosing an agent: ... At closing it was revealed that they got a bigger commission than the seller's agent.
In hindsight, they did steer me a little more vigorously to my property than some others, and the added commission I am sure was no small part of that.
I am happy with the place, so no harm done, but it seems like there is always something less than transparent in this sort of deal.
My transaction was also on the lower end of the type of properties they handle. ...
Good luck to everyone out there who is buying!
Next stop will be moving, then renovations to kitchen and bath.

Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual By my math, the seller's agent got 2% and my agents got 4%.
The normal split in my area is 3% each.
Of course, this is negotiable.




Just curious...

Did you have a written buyers' agency agreement?
If so, did it indicate expected compensation or commission amount?

Most common buyers' agent commission in my market is 2.4%.
Many agents write that 2.4% amount in the agreement, in a field provided for just that purpose.
If there is a variation in buyers' agent commission for a particular property, that agent must "in a timely manner" inform the client:

If there is a shortfall that will necessitate the client coughing up any additional funds.


If there is additional compensation over and above the stated 2.4% that creates additional incentive for the agent to show and close the property.



"Revealing at closing" additional compensation such that the agent may have had undue incentive to steer you where there is more profit could be construed to be self-dealing in North Carolina, and a breach of duty to the client.


In DC, the seller pays all of the agent's commission, or rather, the commission for both sides comes out of the seller's share.
So I didn't see anything about percentages until I got my HUD docs.

The seller's agent was actually the seller's friend.
The seller's partner had purchased a 650K condo in October and the seller was just trying to get out of paying his mortgage.
The property listed for about ten days, price dropped, another two weeks, price dropped, another three days, price dropped to where it was when I put in my offer.
My agents kept reminding me that this place was out there as I looked around.


Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual In DC, the seller pays all of the agent's commission, or rather, the commission for both sides comes out of the seller's share.
So I didn't see anything about percentages until I got my HUD docs.
The seller's agent was actually the seller's friend.
The seller's partner had purchased a 650K condo in October and the seller was just trying to get out of paying his mortgage.
The property listed for about ten days, price dropped, another two weeks, price dropped, another three days, price dropped to where it was when I put in my offer.
My agents kept reminding me that this place was out there as I looked around.


In DC, sellers may pay agents.
Buyers may pay agents.

Your agency agreement did not mention any source of funds for your agent?
We have the mention of agent commission partly to give the client the opportunity for representation in a FSBO situation with no listing agent and now specified co-broke.


Quote:



Originally Posted by MikeJaquish In DC, sellers may pay agents.
Buyers may pay agents.
Your agency agreement did not mention any source of funds for your agent?
We have the mention of agent commission partly to give the client the opportunity for representation in a FSBO situation with no listing agent and now specified co-broke.


My buyers agreement only said that the seller is responsible for the agent's commissions, and that the commission rate was up to (total) 6% of the sales price.


Quote:



Originally Posted by confusedasusual My buyers agreement only said that the seller is responsible for the agent's commissions, and that the commission rate was up to (total) 6% of the sales price.




Wow.
You could have worked them for free on a FSBO.

I like our system here, with some level of documentation that somewhat aligns the client and the agent.


Quote:



Originally Posted by MikeJaquish Wow.
You could have worked them for free on a FSBO.
I like our system here, with some level of documentation that somewhat aligns the client and the agent.


Actually, yeah.
I looked at a FSBO (there are very few in the city) and they got really nervous.
It was way overpriced and not really what I wanted, so it worked out okay but I could tell that they were kinda not into that property.
I think if I would have really liked it, we would have had an issue.
To their credit though, they took me there and didn't balk at all.



####
document number 8: 
How Russian spies bugged the US State Department



(CNN)Most US spy hunters work their entire careers tracking down undercover agents without ever personally playing a direct role in the physical arrest of a spy.

Why wiretapping is still used by agencies 01:31


The retired State Department deputy director of counterintelligence was able to investigate a spy and then actually help to plan and execute an arrest -- a rare thrill that Booth considers himself lucky to be a part of.

In early 1999, Booth and his colleagues learned that Russian spies were listening to classified conversations deep in the heart of Washington's State Department building -- inside a conference room in the same corridor as the Secretary of State's personal office.

The resulting investigation was code-named Sacred Ibis.
Booth, also the author of "State Department Counterintelligence: Leaks, Spies and Lies," spent some time with CNN to talk about that investigation.
Below is a transcript of our conversation, which has been edited for length and clarity.

ROBERT DAVID BOOTH: Sacred Ibis was brought to us by an FBI agent.
Under my agreement [with the government] I can't use his name, but he showed me videotapes and still pictures of a Russian diplomat [named Stanislav Borisovich Gusev].
The intelligence community believed Gusev was a KGB technical officer working under diplomatic cover in the United States.

In one film, Gusev was sitting on a bench in the back of the main State Department building.
He had (a) bag next to him, one hand in the bag, and an earphone plug was in his ear with the wire snaking into the bag.

Once we watched him sitting on the bench with one hand in the bag, one hand in his shirt pocket, smoking a cigarette all the while reading the Washington Post upside down.
Days later, another film revealed him driving a car up the same street where the bench was located.
He would park it, leave it for a couple of hours, then come back and drive off.

In reviewing the film, the intelligence community concluded that Gusev's actions were consistent with a technical operation.
They believed that a bug — a listening device — had been placed inside the State Department's rear facade.

We monitored the area, both physically and technically, and sure enough one of our countermeasure devices strongly indicated there was a listening device on the seventh floor.
We surmised Gusev's car, equipped with Russian Embassy diplomatic plates, contained electronic equipment that would send a signal across the street, activating a bug as a live microphone that picked up conversations in a conference room.

One night we went into the State Department building at 2 o'clock in the morning and used additional equipment to positively identify the listening device that had been concealed inside a chair rail molding on the wall of a 7th floor conference room.

To our incredible surprise, we learned that one group known as the D Committee met in this room to review the official personnel files of senior State Department people.

The committee discussed not only their active personnel file, but also talked candidly about their "corridor reputation."
If the Russians were listening to those conversations, they would have learned about certain vulnerabilities that a number of senior State Department people had.

BOOTH: There was a big debate within the intelligence community about what to do about the listening device.
One segment of the intelligence community said, "Let's leave the bug in place and see if someone tries to service it so we can arrest them on the spot."
Others said, "We've gotta rip it out right away so we can analyze it and develop counter measures; maybe the Russians have similar devices in other areas, like US embassies or private businesses inside the United States."

Others said, "Why don't we just have people go into the conference room and have a controlled conversation that would give the Russians conniptions or give them false information?"

What the intelligence community decided to do was monitor the conference room with microphones and video cameras to see if the Russians were "stealing" enough classified information to make an arrest for violations of the espionage laws and, maybe, to better understand why the Russians chose this conference room.

After about 30-35 days, the 24/7 monitoring operation had drained my office's resources.
The decision was finally made that it was time to arrest the Russian diplomat, grab his car and take the bug off the wall so the intelligence community could analyze it.

But the day we were supposed to make the arrest, Gusev didn't show up.

Then he didn't show up for the rest of the week.

'An incredible moment'


BOOTH: On Monday morning I was in my office and some people were in a foul mood, thinking Gusev escaped arrest.

I had a couple of other cases I had to talk about with a diplomatic security special agent from my office who was monitoring this on the FBI side.
I called him up on a secure, encrypted phone and all of a sudden he interrupts, "Robert, he's off the park."

He was coming back down to park the car to [activate] the listening device.

That was one of those moments.
I thought, "Oh God.
We're gonna do it."

It felt great.
All this work, the intelligence community is getting everything they wanted.
We're going to arrest a Russian diplomat.

I'm sitting in my office window listening to FBI radio reports describing Gusev approaching the State Department in his diplomatic plated Chevy Malibu.

Then, from the sixth floor, I watched Gusev park his Malibu literally right below me in the street right at the entrance of my office.
He had no idea it was Diplomatic Security's main office headquarters at the time.

Watching from my window, I'm having a heart attack.
I'm going crazy.
My poor secretary Teresa Black says, "Robert, you've gotta calm down" as Gusev started putting quarters into the parking meter.

And at that moment I said, "That's it.
We've got him.
We're gonna make the arrest.
We're gonna get the bug.
We're gonna get the car."

It was just an incredible moment.

CNN: Do you think something like this could happen again?

BOOTH: For a Russian or another hostile country's diplomat to get inside the State Department now and do the same thing — that's probably not going to happen.

Editor's note:

Gusev was detained by FBI agents and eventually ordered to leave the United States.
He could not be charged with espionage because he was protected by diplomatic immunity.
According to Booth, the bug allowed the Russians to capture a wide variety of information -- much of it classified -- but nothing that gave "the Kremlin a tactical or strategic edge."
It was never determined exactly how the listening device had been placed in the room, Booth added.
After the incident, the State Department raised its restrictions on foreign diplomats who were allowed to visit the building.

Read CNN's initial coverage from 1999.



####
document number 9: 
An Interview with Teen Inventor R.J. Batts



An Interview with Teen Inventor R.J. Batts


Inventor, entrepreneur, and ninth grader R.J. Batts is a multi-tasking extraordinaire.
In between school, soccer, violin lessons, and speaking to school groups and other inventors’ and entrepreneurs’ organizations, R.J. is the CEO of Picklehead LLC and inventor of the Tip Tough®.

R.J. and his mother, Lori Batts, graciously agreed to an interview to share R.J.’s story and inventive passion, as well as their combined experience developing his innovation and entrepreneurial journey, especially in filing his U.S. patent application.
I hope you enjoy meeting them as much as I did!

Elizabeth Dougherty: Congratulations on becoming an inventor and entrepreneur!
How did this become your path, particularly at such an early age?

R.J. Batts: My mom can tell you I have always been interested in tearing things apart and building things out of available parts.
Being curious and inventive has been a part of my nature for as long as I can remember.

The idea for Tip Tough, which is a protective kitchen tool to guard one’s fingers when using a knife and to aid in stabilizing and cutting food, came to me three years ago.
My father is a professional chef and often came home with knife cuts on his fingers.
I thought to myself that there has to be a way to help him, to make his job easier and safer.
Thinking of a cassette case, I quickly sketched the idea which came to my mind.
However, at the time, I put the idea aside and did not try to pursue it until two years later when I joined a local program, The Young Entrepreneurs Academy, through the local Chamber of Commerce.
I was one of 24 students participating in the academy, most of whom were in 7-10th grades.
The academy helped me develop my business plan, and I went on to use CAD software to design and then ultimately 3D print a prototype of the first version of the Tip Tough.

ED: What types of intellectual property protection have you secured for your company and product?

RJ: We have a federally registered trademark on the Tip Tough and have also filed both a U.S. provisional patent application and a U.S. nonprovisional utility patent application on the device.
We additionally have a copyright on a number of materials, including our website, www.tiptough.com.

ED: What was the experience of filing for a U.S. patent like and do you have any words of advice for other inventors who may be thinking about or preparing to file a U.S. patent application?

RJ: Yes!
Hire the assistance of a good patent attorney.
I first tried to prepare and file an application on my own and found the process too complicated.
Wanting to be successful, through the help of a friend I was able to find a really great patent attorney.
I provided her with my CAD drawings and she was able to write an application that covered all of the features of my invention.
She was incredibly knowledgeable and understood the right language to use when drafting my claims.
My nonprovisional application has been assigned to a U.S. patent examiner and is in line to undergo examination.

ED: What is the makeup of your company and how does the work of running it happen?

RJ: The company is Picklehead LLC, and I am its CEO.
As the CEO, I conduct all demonstrations, product pitches, and am the face of the company.
I am integral to all decision making in the company.
Additionally, there are three other employees: my mom is COO and Picklehead’s bookkeeper.
We also have an executive assistant and director of sales.
The four of us are currently able to run the company, and we have received our first run of product.
It is important to me and the company that Tip Tough is manufactured in America, specifically in Maryland, and employing people in our local area and producing our product locally.
Made in America is a strong part of our recipe for success and something which I recommend other inventors and businesses consider.

ED: What have you learned as you have traveled the road of invention and entrepreneurship and can you share any tips or tools for success?

RJ: I have learned to look for and take advantage of opportunities, especially where money is involved.
There are a lot of resources, like the Young Entrepreneurs Academy, where federal, state, or local organizations want to help small business by providing things like education, funding, and mentoring.
Look for these organizations and what they have to offer.
I have been able to get quite a bit of funding from organizations and competitions, and I was able to put that money towards getting my prototype made and other costs of bringing my invention forward.
Starting a business isn’t inexpensive but it is incredibly rewarding.

I would also encourage inventors and entrepreneurs to become superheroes when it comes to networking.
I am constantly networking wherever I am; networking is incredibly valuable and sometimes you can’t predict where a connection might lead you or the help a person can offer to you.

Last but not least, keep an invention notebook.
I have always kept a journal of my ideas and inventive thoughts and am already working on new ideas for Picklehead.
While I can’t tell you what they are right now, I know they are going to be awesome!

ED: You were recently featured at the International Home and Housewares Show (IHHS) in Chicago as the youngest inventor ever at the IHHS.
How has the IHHS helped move your invention forward and what do inventors need to know about participating in a trade show?

RJ: The IHHS was an amazing but tiring experiencing!
I definitely recommend that inventors trying to sell their product participate in a trade show, but be prepared.
Be prepared to talk to everyone and anyone.
Bring lots of business cards and ask everyone for their business card.
Be sure to write critical follow-up information or points to remember on the back of their business card as it all becomes a blur with the large number of people you meet.
Participate in as many pitch opportunities as possible; you never know who might be in the audience and interested in your product.
Make sure you have a good team in place; it is impossible to participate in a trade show without good help and backup.
The company hired a public relations company in advance of the show and they created a media kit for us in addition to securing local media attention and developing a social media buzz.
It was a valuable investment!

ED: Do you have a favorite inventor, and if, so who?

RJ: I sure do: Aaron Krauss, inventor of the Scrub Daddy.
Aaron is a cool guy and we have a lot in common.
I am super impressed by how far he has taken his company and how he continues to pursue new things.
I’d like to have his kind of success.

###

I wish R.J. the best of success in his innovation journey and would like to thank him and Lori for their time and information.
Both R.J. and Lori are committed to helping other inventors and entrepreneurs, including students, through regular community outreach and engagement.
Interested in meeting R.J. in person?
Come to the USPTO’s Invention-Con 2017 in Alexandria, Virginia, August 11-12, where R.J. will be a featured speaker.

The USPTO gives you useful information and non-legal advice in the areas of patents and trademarks.
The patent and trademark statutes and regulations should be consulted before attempting to apply for a patent or register a trademark.
These laws and the application process can be complicated.
If you have intellectual property that could be patented or registered as a trademark, the use of an attorney or agent who is qualified to represent you in the USPTO is advised.

The USPTO gives you useful information and non-legal advice in the areas of patents and trademarks.
The patent and trademark statutes and regulations should be consulted before attempting to apply for a patent or register a trademark.
These laws and the application process can be complicated.
If you have intellectual property that could be patented or registered as a trademark, the use of an attorney or agent who is qualified to represent you in the USPTO is advised.



####
document number 10: 
5 Reasons You Should Hire a Real Estate Agent


What’s up to evеry body, it’s mmy first pay a visit of this website; this ᴡeblog cаrries awеsome and truly good data in support оff visitors.
https://cherryebomb.blogspot.com/


Thanks for bringing up how real estate agents can offer professional negotiation skills by facilitating a "win-win" situation.
My wife and I are planning on buying a house soon.
Hopefully, we can find someone who can help us find a home for a reasonable price.


My sister is planning to purchase a brand new house and lot for her growing family.
She is in need of a professional who can educate with the current trends in the market.
Thanks for mentioning that a good real estate agent must have the objectivity, networking and marketing skills to other agents, and can assist you with the legalities when it comes to paperwork.
Cheers!


I truly believe that getting a well experienced and educated real estate agent should be taken into consideration in buying a new house.
As a first time owner, I want to make sure that everything will go well especially the paperwork and permits.
I want to talk to a local agent who has knowledge in the local market trends and movements and someone who could give me the best advice in my real estate needs.
Cheers!


My best friend is planning to do an open house this coming weekend to the people in their community.
They will be migrating into a different city and they are looking for prospective buyers of their house and all the appliances.
She is currently looking for a real estate agent who is able to connect to a network of different agents, past clients, and friends.
Thanks for adding that a good agent can also assist them with the processing of the paperwork.
Cheers!


Thanks for informative post.
That’s right!
home buyers/sellers should hire good real estate agents.
Agents can help you weed out unwanted properties by getting detail on what you’re looking for in a home.
They can email you a list of properties based on your specifications.
This will help you save time and energy.


It makes sense that professional real estate agents are skilled negotiators.
My wife and I would like to buy a new house soon.
I will make sure that we find an agent that can help with the negotiation process.


Really it’s a wonderful blog and a very informative one thanks for this useful blog.



####
document number 11: 
The June 2018 Cologne Ricin Plot: A New Threshold in Jihadi Bio Terror


Abstract:

In June 2018, German security services uncovered an alleged terrorist plot involving ricin by a Tunisian extremist living in Cologne suspected of being inspired by and in touch with the Islamic State.
It was the first time a jihadi terrorist in the West has successfully produced the toxic biological agent.
The case illustrates the existing threat of bioterrorism in Europe.
It also shows the importance of electronic surveillance to uncover plots by radicalized individuals using the internet to obtain deadly material.


On June 12, 2018, heavily armed German special forces police with gas masks raided a residential building in the city of Cologne (North Rhine-Westphalia) in Western Germany.

1

A Tunisian national named Sief Allah H., who lived at the premises, was arrested.
His wife, a German convert to Islam named Yasmin H., was also taken into police custody and was later accused of helping her husband in a terrorist plot.
Police investigators and bio-chemical experts of the Robert Koch Institute, wearing full protective gear, then entered the residential block and searched several apartments.

2

They were looking for the poison ricin.

Terrorist suspect Sief Allah H. had been monitored by German security services for a number of weeks prior to his arrest.
Investigators discovered Sief Allah H. had ordered suspicious material and believed he was working to build an explosive device containing the deadly substance ricin.
German intelligence had learned that Sief Allah H. had bought various materials via the internet, including more than a thousand castor beans and an electronic coffee grinder.
During the police raid, a powdery substance was found, which subsequently tested positive for ricin.

3

Holger Münch, head of Germany’s Federal Criminal Police Office (BKA), stated shortly after the raid, "There were pretty specific preparations for such a crime, using, if you want, a bio-bomb.
This is a unique case, at least for Germany."

4


Previous Ricin Plots Ricin is a by-product of castor beans (the seeds of the Ricinus plant) from which castor oil can be produced with uses in various industries and products.
Ricin can be lethal to human beings when ingested or if introduced to the blood stream because it interferes with protein production.
According to the Center for Disease Control, as a warfare agent "ricin could be used to expose people through the air, food, or water."

5


In 1978, ricin was used in the assassination of the Bulgarian dissident and journalist Georgi Markov.
On Waterloo Bridge in London, an agent for the Bulgarian secret police shot a ricin pellet into Markov’s leg from a modified umbrella.
He died several days later.

6


Jihadi terrorists have also shown an interest in carrying out attacks with ricin.
In January 2003, a British counterterrorism operation was launched against a suspected al-Qai`da-linked cell allegedly plotting to carry out an attack on U.K. streets with ricin and other poisons.
Twenty-two castor beans were retrieved from an address in Wood Green, in north London, as well as the equipment needed to produce ricin and a recipe for ricin.

7

The main suspect, Algerian Kamel Bourgass, was later sentenced to 17 years in prison for "conspiracy to cause a public nuisance by the use of poisons and/or explosives to cause disruption, fear or injury."
Bourgass had already been sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of detective Stephen Oake, whom he stabbed to death during his arrest in Manchester.
All other suspects charged were either acquitted

8

or had their trials abandoned.

9


In August 2011,

The New York Times

reported that U.S. counterterrorism officials were "increasingly concerned" that al-Qa`ida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) was "trying to produce the lethal poison ricin, to be packed around small explosives for attacks against the United States."

10


There have also been a number of plots, including by extreme right-wing groups to carry out ricin poisonings in the United States.

11

Weaponizing ricin into a component of an improvised explosive device is nevertheless regarded as very difficult.

12


The Cologne Case If the allegations are proven, the Cologne case would be the first time a jihadi terrorist in the West successfully produced ricin.
The main suspect, Sief Allah H., was born in Tunisia.
Little is known yet about his path to alleged radicalization.
While still living in Tunisia, he met a German woman on the internet.
In October 2015, the pair married in Tunisia.
Sief Allah H. legally entered Germany for the first time on November 24, 2016,

13

and moved into an apartment in the Osloer Straße in Cologne-Chorweiler with his wife.
At the time of their arrest, the couple had two children.

The first time Sief Allah H. appeared on the radar of German counterterrorism forces was on December 12, 2017, when city officials in Cologne informed police that he had reported he had lost his Tunisian passport.
The suspicion was that Sief Allah H. had traveled to a conflict zone and was seeking to replace passports that might contain entry stamps or visas in order to hide terrorist activities.

14

At some point after Sief Allah H. came onto the radar, German authorities asked Tunisian authorities for additional information on him and were told that while living in Tunisia, he was suspected of being a follower of salafi ideology.

15


Germany’s Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (BfV), the country’s domestic intelligence agency, at some point learned that Sief Allah H. had, in the fall of 2017, twice tried to travel to Syria—probably to join the Islamic State—but had been stopped in Turkey on both occasions.

16

According to the General Federal Prosecutor’s Office, Sief Allah H’s wife, Yasmin H., had initially planned to travel to Syria as well.
She allegedly was concerned about her children’s safety and instead only bought plane tickets for Sief Allah H.

17


There was an apparent dispute between the couple in the weeks that followed.
On January 8, 2018, Yasmin H. contacted Cologne police and filed a legal proceeding against her husband for "domestic violence" in three cases since 2017.

18

Yasmin H. claimed an argument between them relating to how Islam should be interpreted was the reason for the attacks by her husband.
The same day, police came to the couple’s apartment and ordered Sief Allah H. to leave for at least 10 days.

19


On January 25, 2018, Yasmin H. and Sief Allah H. came to the police station for questioning.
During the interview, Yasmin H. withdrew the complaint and stated the problems with her husband had been resolved.

20


On June 1, 2018, the BfV called for a meeting of the working group "Operative Information Sharing" within the Gemeinsame Terrorismus Abwehrzentrum (GTAZ) in Berlin.
The Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND), the Federal Criminal Police Office (BKA), the Federal Police (Bundespolize), the German Federal Office GBA, the Federal Office for Migration and Refugees (BAMF), and various other security agencies took part in the meeting.

21

At this meeting, the BfV had new information to share.
After Sief Allah H. had come onto the radar screen of authorities for his missing passport, the BfV had received a tip-off from the public that he was probably a radicalized individual sympathizing with the Islamic State.

22


On June 11, 2018, the working group "Operative Information Sharing" met again at GTAZ and discussed the case.

23

This time, BfV presented more detailed information regarding Sief Allah H. allegedly preparing for a possible terrorist attack using the poison ricin.

At some point in the preceding weeks, a British intelligence agency had warned the Bundesnachrichtendienst (BND) about suspicious online shopping activities by a Tunisian living in Germany.
The British had discovered the purchases through some form of electronic surveillance.

24

Further investigation established that this individual was Sief Allah H.
In May 2018, he had bought at least 1,000 castor beans and an electronic coffee grinder via Amazon Marketplace.

25


After the British tip-off, German security agencies started to monitor Sief Allah H.’s activities.
His phone was wiretapped, and he was put under 24/7 surveillance.
Not long afterward, BfV and BKA came to the conclusion that Sief Allah H. had probably obtained material that could be used to build an improvised explosive device (IED).

26


Initially, investigators believed Sief Allah H. was "hiding his activities from his wife."
Sief Allah H., for example, sometimes stayed in a second unoccupied apartment in the same building he had access to, probably to store material.

27

But German authorities subsequently alleged Yasmin H. helped Sief Allah H. order the material he needed by knowingly giving him access to her PayPal account, and she had bought the plane tickets to Turkey when he had allegedly attempted to join the Islamic State.
According to German authorities, the couple even bought a hamster to test the ricin on a living being.
When German police raided the apartment, they found the hamster alive in a cage.
Investigators believe Sief Allah H. tested some of the toxin on the animal.
They believe the animal’s survival was due to the nature of the test.
According to a German security official, the ricin that was produced by Sief Allah H. was potentially lethal.

28


Furthermore, investigators found out that Sief Allah H. had bought a sleeping bag and an additional battery (power-bank) via the internet.
He also asked his wife for 1,000 Euro in cash (which he never got).

29

This behavior led to the conclusion that the suspect was probably preparing to travel—with concern that he was perhaps planning to flee the country after carrying out an attack in Germany.

30


On June 12, 2018, at 8:10 AM, Cologne police created a so-called "Besondere Aufbauorganisation" (BAO)

a

to deal with the imminent threat of a potential bomb plot.

31

And Germany’s Public Prosecutor General filed a case for "Preparation of a serious violent offence endangering the state"

32

against Sief Allah H.
At around 7:00 PM the same day, Sief Allah H. left the residential building in Osloer Straße in Cologne-Chorweiler and was then arrested by police and taken into custody.
Later in the evening, the apartments he used were searched.

By the time police launched the raid, Sief Allah H. had already allegedly started producing ricin.
Investigators found 84.3 milligrams of already-produced ricin and 3,150 castor beans.

This was a greatly larger number than the 22 castor beans retrieved from the Wood Green residence in London in 2003.
Of the castor beans retrieved in Cologne, 2,100 were bought via the internet.
The origin of the other beans is still unknown.
Two hundred fifty small metal balls, two bottles of nail polish remover containing acetone, light bulbs, cables, and 250 grams of a grey powder (aluminum powder and substances from fireworks).

33


Three mobile phones were also confiscated during the investigation.
On two of these phones the BKA discovered around 180,000 images, 2,000 video and audio files, and around 33,000 text and chat messages.
More than 9,000 chat messages, 11,000 contacts, and several files containing bomb-making manuals were stored on one of the devices.

34

Amongst the content, allegedly, was a certain amount of jihadi propaganda, including items related to the Islamic State.

35

According to the German Public Prosecutor General, Sief Allah H. had been in contact with supporters and probably even members of the Islamic State since the fall of 2017.

36

Police officers of a special unit wear protective clothes and respiratory masks during an operation on June 12, 2018, in Cologne’s Chorweiler district, western Germany, where police found toxic substances after storming an apartment.
(David Young /AFP/Getty Images)


The International Link According to sources close to the investigation, Sief Allah H. was most likely following online video instructions on how to make and weaponize ricin posted by a jihadi terrorist group in 2016.

37


The same online video manual was allegedly found during an investigation against two Egyptian brothers in France.

38

On May 11, 2018, French counterterrorism police arrested two terrorist suspects in the northern 18th arrondissement of Paris.
French Interior Minister Gerard Collomb said that two men had been arrested for "preparing to commit an attack, with either explosives or ricin, this very powerful poison."
According to authorities, the suspects had communicated via the messaging app Telegram.
"They had tutorials that showed how to make ricin-based poisons," Collomb said.
"We were able to detect them, detect this attack plan and were able to arrest them."

39

One of the Egyptian brothers, named as Mohamed M., was later charged with "association with a terrorist enterprise"

40

by the French anti-terrorism prosecutor.

41


There is no indication Tunisian Sief Allah H. was in contact with the two terrorist suspects in France.
But, as already noted, according to the German Public Prosecutor General, Sief Allah H. had communicated with Islamic State-linked suspects overseas since the fall of 2017.

42

According to a German security official, those operatives were suspected to be based in North Africa or Syria.

43

Earlier this month German authorities publicly alleged Sief Allah H. was in contact via Telegram with at least two people suspected of being associated with the Islamic State.
One of these persons allegedly gave him advice on the ricin production and the other one sent him information on how to build an explosive device.

44

In early August 2018, the Tunisian Ministry of Interior stated two terrorist suspects had been arrested in connection with the Cologne ricin plot.
Both men are suspected of being linked to Sief Allah H.

45

It is unclear whether the two suspects arrested in Tunisia are the same two people who were allegedly providing advice on how to make ricin and explosives.

The investigation into the ricin plot in Germany is still ongoing.
Some of the confiscated material was taken to the Robert Koch Institute for further examination.
Sief Allah H. and his wife, Yasmin H., remain in custody.

Conclusion The Cologne case saw a new threshold reached for the jihadi bio terror threat in the West.
If the allegations are proven, Sief Allah H. would be the first jihadi terrorist suspect in the West to successfully produce ricin.
Equally troublingly, the case suggests radicalized individuals are indeed able to produce a biological weapon using internet tutorials.
Though the Islamic State is in rapid decline in Syria and Iraq, the manuals and how-to instructions for explosives and other weapons are still available online.
This material, which is being shared via Telegram channels and other forms of communication, still has the potential to inspire jihadis across the globe.

In addition, German security officials are still very concerned about Islamic State operatives who survived the territorial collapse of the caliphate using social media to recruit and instruct possible attackers.

46


Furthermore, the Cologne ricin case highlights the importance of electronic surveillance to uncover such plots.
It was only because Sief Allah H.’s online purchases were flagged by intelligence services that police were able to prevent a possible attack.
CTC

Florian Flade is Chief National Security Reporter for the

WELT

and

WELT am Sonntag

newspapers.
He is based in Berlin and blogs about jihadism at ojihad.wordpress.com.
Follow @FlorianFlade


Substantive Notes [a] BAO is a police organization structure set up to deal with specific cases.

Citations [1] As seen in video by

Express

(German Media), "Hatte Tunesier Giftanschlag geplant.
Polizei mit Spezialkräften," YouTube, June 13, 2018.

[6] Matt Vasilogambros, "Why Ricin Is The Domestic Terrorist´s Toxin of Choice,"

Atlantic

, May 30, 2013; Richard Edwards, "Poison-tip umbrella assassination of Georgi Markov reinvestigated,"

Daily Telegraph

, June 19, 2008.

[8] Severin Carrell and Raymond Whitaker, "Ricin: The plot that never was,"

Independent

, April 17, 2005.

[11] "Two Georgia men convicted in ricin plot against U.S. government," Reuters, January 17, 2014; Eliott C. McLaughlin, "Texas actress who sent Obama ricin sentenced to 18 years," CNN, July 16, 2014.

[12] Author interview, German security official, July 2018.

[13] Briefing by Interior Minister Herbert Reuel of North Rhine-Westphalia, July 5, 2018.

[15] Author interview, German security official, July 2018.

[18] Briefing by Interior Minister Herbert Reuel.

[22] Ibid.
; "Polizei findet noch mehr Rizinus-Samen,"

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung

, June 20, 2018.

[23] Briefing by Interior Minister Herbert Reuel.

[26] Briefing by Interior Minister Herbert Reuel.

[28] Statement by German Public Prosecutor General, July 24, 2018; author interview, German security official, August 2018.

[29] Briefing by Interior Minister Herbert Reuel.

[31] Briefing by Interior Minister Herbert Reuel.

[32] "Section 89a: Preparation of a serious violent offence endangering the state," German Criminal Code.

[33] Statement by the German Public Prosecutor General, June 20, 2018.

[34] Jorg Diehl and Fidelius Schmid, "Ermittler müssen gewaltige Datenmengen auswerten," Spiegel Online, July 7, 2018.

[35] Author interview, German security official, July 2018.

[39] Henry Samuel, "Man charged after French police foil Paris ricin terror plot,"

Daily Telegraph

, May 18, 2018.

[40] "Possible ricin attack foiled in Paris; Egyptian man arrested," Associated Press, May 18, 2018.

[45] Statement by the Ministry of Interior in Tunisia, August 2, 2018.



####
document number 12: 
Proving Insurance Fraud: Real Case Studies




1.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Robert R. Pohls, Managing Attorney2011 Western Claim Conference Renaissance Esmeralda HotelSeptember 20, 2011 Indian Wells, California


2.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES AGENDA 1.
What is insurance fraud?
2.
Recognizing insurance fraud 3.
The Claim-Handler’s Dilemma 4.
Claim Strategies 5.
Litigation Strategies 6.
Trial Strategies 7.
Claim Management Considerations 8.
QuestionsSlide 2


3.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES WHAT IS INSURANCE FRAUD?
Legal definition of fraud: "One who willfully deceives another with intent to induce him to alter his position to his injury or risk, is liable for any damages which he thereby suffers."
Cal.
Civil Code §1709Slide 3


4.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES WHAT IS INSURANCE FRAUD?
Examples of actionable fraud: · Suggesting a fact is true when not believed to be true · Asserting a fact is true without reason for believing it to be true · Suppressing a fact when obligated to disclose it or giving information which is likely to mislead about that fact · Making a promise without any intent to perform it Cal.
Civil Code §1710Slide 4


5.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES WHAT IS INSURANCE FRAUD?
Working definition of insurance fraud: "Any deliberate deception perpetrated against or by an insurance company or agent for the purpose of unwarranted financial gain."
Coalition Against Insurance FraudSlide 5


6.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES WHAT IS INSURANCE FRAUD?
Types of insurance fraud: Hard Fraud When someone deliberately plans or invents a loss that is covered by their insurance policy in order to receive benefits Soft Fraud When the policyholder exaggerates an otherwise legitimate claimSlide 6


7.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES WHAT IS INSURANCE FRAUD?
Examples of insurance fraud: Life · Misrepresentations (or omissions) in application · Fake death claims · Fraudulent procurement Health · Provider fraud (bogus treatment/diagnosis) Disability · False claim of injury or sickness · Exaggeration of symptoms/functional impairment · Concealment of income-producing activitySlide 7


8.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES RECOGNIZING INSURANCE FRAUD Fraudulent insurance claims are purposely made to look legitimate.
Claimants often "control" the circumstances surrounding a fraudulent claim: · Time · Place · Witnesses · Nature of Injury · Symptoms Claimants learn from past claim experiences: · Paid Claims · Denied Claims · Fraud by Others · "Professional" CrooksSlide 8


9.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES RECOGNIZING INSURANCE FRAUD Fraudulent claims often are crimes of opportunity.
Pay attention to claims that involve those opportunities.
Consider fraud reporting obligations or referral to SIU.
Trust your instincts . .
.Slide 9


10.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #1 Gregory v.
Company Two men from North Las Vegas go to an agent’s office in suburban Henderson to apply for a $250,000 life insurance policy.
Conditional receipt given in exchange for tender of initial premium.
Insured fails to appear for paramedical exam because he was murdered.
Police suspect the man who accompanied him to the agent’s office (who was to be named as the beneficiary).Slide 10


11.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES THE CLAIM-HANDLER’S DILEMMA You should be trying to confirm that benefits are payable.
Investigating the possibility of insurance fraud creates the impression you are trying to establish that benefits are not payable.
· If you are right, you may uncover a fraud.
· If you are wrong, you may make it difficult to defend a claim for bad faith.Slide 11


12.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #1: A picture’s worth a thousand words.Slide 12


13.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #2: Read Between The Lines.Slide 13


14.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #3 Multiple-Murder/Suicide Insured dies in a multiple-murder suicide during the contestable period.
· Application denied prescription drug use.
· Vendor’s database reflects no known prescriptions.
Medical records predominantly relate to childbirths and known history of surgery.
OB/GYN’s records also mention insured’s request for anti- depressants and doctor’s prescription for Lexapro.Slide 14


15.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Mama always said: "IF YOU TELL ONE LIE, YOU’LL HAVE TO TELL ANOTHER.
"Slide 15


16.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Proposed Insured: Stacey Applicant/Owner: Cynthia Proposed Beneficiaries: Cynthia’s 3 children (all minors) Application: · Completed in agent’s office (Los Angeles) · Dated: March 17, 2004 · Physical Description: 32 years old 5’1" and 120 lbs.
· No Adverse Medical History · No History of Tobacco Use · Occupation: UnemployedSlide 16


17.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Face Amount Applied For: $50,000 Monthly Premium: Less than $20/month Cash With Application: First month’s premium · No paramedical examination · Additional underwriting requirements satisfied on May 3, 2004 · Underwriter approved application: 4:48 p.m. on May 5, 2004 · Pronounced dead at 6:20 a.m. on May 6, 2004 · Agent was told Stacey died of a heart attackSlide 17


18.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Initial Telephone Interview of Cynthia · Stacey had "never been ill and didn’t have a family physician."
· Stacey had gone to Houston to visit their mom and became ill.
· Stacey was taken to "the largest trauma center in Houston," which is where she died.
· Cause of death is not yet known.Slide 18


19.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Stacey’s Mom · Stacey died of a "massive heart attack."
· Stacey had been "physically healthy."
· Stacey was mentally ill.
· Stacey had been living in a nursing home in Southern CA · Had "breathing problems" in March 2004.
· Was moved to a Southern CA hospital for 4-5 days, then transferred to hospital in Houston "to be closer.
"Slide 19


20.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #3: Give ’em some rope.Slide 20


21.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Cynthia · Stacey had been "in and out of mental type institutes."
· Someone asked her if she had insurance "in case something happened to" Stacey.
· Picked Stacey up from a nursing home one day to go shopping with two friends, then to agent’s office to sign the application.Slide 21


22.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Cynthia · Did not remember any application questions being read to her.
· Just "signed the application" where "she was told to."
· Told the agent that "if something happened to her and her sister, she wanted her [Cynthia’s] kids to be the beneficiaries.
"Slide 22


23.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Cynthia · Reported that she has "only a 5th grade reading/writing level."
· Claimed she went to the agent because the insurer indicated its agents would "do everything" for her.
· Trusted the agent "with everything."
· Told the agent that: · Stacey "was in a nursing home for mental problems."
· Cynthia was supposed to be the beneficiary, not her kids.
· Friends and family told her to "get a lawyer.
"Slide 23


24.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Cynthia · Told the agent in January 2004 that Stacey was mentally ill and living in a nursing home.
· One friend went with her and Stacey to the agent’s office to sign the application on March 17, 2004.
· "no questions were asked."
· she and Stacey "both signed paperwork" where told.
· Is "sure the agent is trying to trick her as she is sure the agent forged her signature on the policy.
"Slide 24


25.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Cynthia · Stacey left Los Angeles for Houston on April 22, 2004.
· Stacey "got away from" her mother, became delusional, and was admitted to hospital involuntarily.
· Stacey was discharged, then re-admitted after a week or two, just before she died.
· Stacey was 5’1" or 5’2" and weighed about 260 lbs.Slide 25


26.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #4: Dig deep . .
.
really deep.Slide 26


27.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Autopsy Report Death was the result of "[c]ardiomegaly associated with hypertensive cardiovascular disease," secondary to obesity.
Height: 5’ 4" Weight: 309 lbs.Slide 27


28.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Medical Records · hypertension, with non-compliance regarding treatment and abnormal EKG’s associated with the hypertension; · asthma, COPD and pulmonary hypertension; · obesity; · congestive heart failure and cardiomegaly; and · ten year history of mental/nervous disorders, including numerous medications and institutional stays.Slide 28


29.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Medical Records (California) Medical Center 6/17/2003 - 10/31/2003 (California) Care Center 10/31/2003 - 1/23/2004 (California) Hospital 1/23/2004 - 1/27/2004 (California) Nursing Home 1/27/2004 - 3/5/2004 (California) Hospital 3/5/2004 - 3/11/2004 (Texas) Hospital 3/14/2004 - 4/8/2004* (Texas) Hospital E.R. 4/11/2004 - 4/12/2004 (Texas) Psych Ward 4/12/2004 - 5/6/2004Slide 29


30.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Medical Records 3/5/2004 Admitted (SOB/aggressive behavior) 3/9/2004 "Cardiology assessment with COPD confirmed . .
.
Discussed patient’s predicament last night by phone with patient’s sister, Cynthia, and mother.
On learning of CHF, they agreed to permit . .
.
development of appropriate Tx."
3/11/2004 Discharged (to fly with Cynthia’s Mom to Texas)Slide 30


31.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #5: Get them to commit.Slide 31


32.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Agent · Only two people came to the office on the application date: Cynthia and Stacey.
· All application questions were read aloud while displayed on two computer monitors.
· Cynthia had no problem reading the questions.
· Stacey answered all the questions "No."
· Would not have taken the application if knew Stacey was in a nursing home for mental problems.Slide 32


33.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Agent’s Assistant · Came to office on date application was completed · Called just before coming · No prior calls, messages or discussions about Stacey Letters from Agent and Agent’s Assistant · Application completed on March 17, 2004 Telephone Call to Cynthia · One friend – Michele – was with Cynthia and Stacey when the application was signed in the agent’s office.
· Michele "moves around a lot" and cannot be contacted.Slide 33


34.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #6: Tie up any loose ends.Slide 34


35.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Interview of Agent · Cynthia specifically said she did not want to be named the beneficiary.
· Cynthia gave no reason for not naming herself.
Letters from Agent and Agent’s Assistant · Cynthia asked that her three kids be named beneficiaries.Slide 35


36.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Call to Agent · Cynthia signed the application when it was filled out.
Claim Form Addendum:Slide 36


37.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Call to Agent · Stacey signed the HIV consent form on the date the application was completed · Application was mailed to Cynthia’s home for Stacey to sign HIV Consent Form ApplicationSlide 37


38.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Telephone Call to Agent · Stacey signed the HIV consent form on the date the application was completed · Application was mailed to Cynthia’s home for Stacey to sign HIV Consent Form ApplicationSlide 38


39.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES CLAIM STRATEGY #7: Get an Explanation.Slide 39


40.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Denial Letter Our investigation indicates Stacey was confined in a hospital "in Houston, Texas from March 14, 2004 to April 8, 2004; therefore she could not have appeared in the agent’s office in California to complete this application, as confirmed by Cynthia in previous statements."
In addition, "the application did not include information about the insured’s history of schizophrenia, hypertension with non- compliance regarding treatment, abnormal EKGs associated with the hypertension, congestive heart failure, cardiomegaly, and pulmonary hypertension during her confinement.
"Slide 40


41.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Attorney’s Response "On March 17, 2004, Stacey, Cynthia and a friend" (Michele) went to the agent’s office.
· No one asked them questions.
· Neither of them signed a document with medical questions.
· Cynthia left the office with a Binding Receipt.
As of March 17, 2004, Stacey "was residing in a nursing home in Pasadena, California.
To the extent any medical records show Stacey residing in Texas as of that date, they are in error.
"Slide 41


42.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES LITIGATION STRATEGY #1: Don’t bite off more than you can chew!
Proving fraud requires evidence of: • Representation of fact • Falsity • Knowledge of falsity • Intent to deceive • Actual reliance • Reasonable reliance • DamageSlide 42


43.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Basic Contract Principles Every contract requires consenting parties.
If there is mutual assent to the subject matter of the agreement, a contract results.
However, it may be voidable when there is a harmful mistake as to some basic or material fact that induced the aggrieved party to enter it.
· If both parties are mistaken and neither is at fault (or both are equally to blame), the mistake may prevent formation of a contract.
· A contract formed when one party has made a unilateral mistake is not voidable unless the other party had reason to know of the mistake or his or her fault caused it.Slide 43


44.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Insurance Laws California "If a representation is false in a material point, whether affirmative or promissory, the injured party is entitled to rescind the contract from the time the representation becomes false."
Cal.
Ins.
Code §359 Whether the representation was intentionally or unintentionally false does not alter the injured partys right to rescind the policy.
Telford v.
New York Life Ins.
Co., 9 Cal.2d 103, 105 (1937)Slide 44


45.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Insurance Laws No.
Carolina ". .
.
a representation, unless material or fraudulent, will not prevent a recovery on the policy."
N.C. Gen.
Stat.
§58-3-10 Illinois "No such misrepresentation or false warranty shall defeat or avoid the policy unless it shall have been made with actual intent to deceive or materially affects either the acceptance of the risk or the hazard assumed by the company."
215 ILCS 5/154Slide 45


46.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Insurance Laws Ohio No answer to any interrogatory made by an applicant in his application for a policy shall bar the right to recover upon any policy issued thereon . .
.
unless it is clearly proved that such answer is willfully false, that it was fraudulently made, that it is material, and that it induced the company to issue the policy, that but for such answer the policy would not have been issued, and that the agent or company had no knowledge of the falsity or fraud of such answer.
Ohio Rev.
Code §3911.06 See also, Ohio Rev.
Code §3923.14Slide 46


47.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Consider Alternatives Application Agreement: "Coverage will be effective as of the policy date if the following conditions are met: · the first premium is paid when the policy is delivered; · the Proposed Insureds are living on the delivery date; and · on the delivery date, the information given to the Company is true and complete without material changes.Slide 47


48.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Consider Alternatives Binding Receipt: · "There is no coverage under this Receipt if the application contains any material misrepresentation."
· "No death benefit is provided by this Receipt unless death results from an accident that occurs or an illness that first manifests itself after the Application Date."
· "Coverage under this Receipt will end when the first of the following occurs: (a) The application is approved; (b) Notice of disapproval of the application is given; (c) 60 days have expired starting with the Application Date.
"Slide 48


49.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES LITIGATION STRATEGY #2: Gather all your bricks.Slide 49


50.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 1.
Do I have the complete file?
- All coverage(s) with the company.
- Correct policy forms with all riders.
- All signed application forms, especially the delivery requirements.
- Conditional receipt form.
- Applicable underwriting guidelines.Slide 50


51.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 1.
Do I have the complete file?
- Recording of inspection report/telephone verification.
- Premium/Billing information.
- Outstanding or incomplete investigation.
- Medical record requests (time period).
- Inspect original application documents to assess the appearance of alteration – different handwriting or color ink.Slide 51


52.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 2.
Is the policy contestable?
· Has the policy been in effect less than two years?
· Review the language of the contestability provision.
· except for fraudulent misstatements.
· strict two years.
· If outside the contestability period, are you in a jurisdiction that provides other recourse?
· Are there other ways to adjudicate the claim?
· Waiver of premium rider (life insurance) · Pre-existing condition limitationSlide 52


53.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 3.
What do we need to prove?
· Which state’s law applies?
· Require proof of intent to deceive?
· Require proof of loss-causation?
· If group insurance: · Does ERISA apply?
· Do DOL regulations impose other requirements?Slide 53


54.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 4.
Misrepresentation/Concealment · Are there misrepresentations in the application?
· Were facts omitted from responses in the application?
· Were the facts subjective or objective?
"Have you ever received treatment for or been diagnosed as having or had any of the following?"
"Within the past 5 years have you had a physical examination, medical consultation, X-ray or laboratory study, or been a patient in a hospital or other medical facility?
"Slide 54


55.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 5.
Materiality · Were the misrepresented/concealed facts material?
· Is there an underwriter’s opinion about materiality?
· Are there written underwriting guidelines that support the underwriter’s opinion?
· Did the underwriter comply with those guidelines?
· What information did the underwriter consider?
· Did the underwriter know of other facts that created a duty to make further inquiries?Slide 55


56.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 6.
Conditional Receipts · Generally two types that provide different contractual rights: 1) Provides coverage if conditions are met, with a beginning and end date; 2) Fixes a date for determining insurability, if conditions are met.Slide 56


57.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 6.
Conditional Receipts · When did the Company get the money?
· How long did it take to underwrite the application?
· Compare to company standards · What caused the delay?
· Was the policy delivered?
· How?
· By whom?Slide 57


58.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 7.
Change in Health · What documents were signed at time of delivery?
· Do the medical records suggest any material change in the insured’s health and/or insurability during the underwriting process?
· Were those facts misrepresented or concealed in the delivery receipt?
· Were those facts material?Slide 58


59.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 8.
Reinstated Policies · Was the policy ever reinstated?
· Does the reinstatement application provide an alternative basis for adjudicating the claim?
"The reinstated policy will only cover disabilities due to injury occurring after the date of reinstatement, and due to sickness beginning more than 10 days after that date.
"Slide 59


60.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 9.
Agent Misconduct · Investigate the agent’s relationship with the company and with the insured · Review the agent’s statement (with application and in claim file) · Interview the agent · Get the agent’s filesSlide 60


61.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Rescission Checklist 10.
Claim Determination · Appropriate tone · Properly quotes from applicable policy provisions · Factually accurate · Identifies all basis for decision, including alternate grounds · Avoids inconsistent positions · Complies with company protocols · Was there a reservation of rights?Slide 61


62.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES LITIGATION STRATEGY #3: Leave no stone unturned.Slide 62


63.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #3 Multiple-Murder/Suicide · Application denied prescription drug use.
· Vendor’s database reflects no known prescriptions.
· OB/GYN’s records also mention insured’s request for anti- depressants and doctor’s prescription for Lexapro.
· Pharmacy records confirmed one prescription filled.
· Report of underwriting telephone interview also denied prescription drug use.
· Recording: "I had my OB prescribe anti-depressants, and I filled the prescription once . .
.
But I never took them.
"Slide 63


64.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES LITIGATION STRATEGY #4: Make a new friend.Slide 64


65.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #5 Spencer v.
Company · Insured claims to be totally disabled by generalized back pain · Former occupation as an independent cameraman · Claim file reflects a website devoted to his business which promotes his projects · Insured suggests all projects were completed long ago · Insured claims to have had no new projects in years · Also claims to have refused projects because unable to hold and operate his cameraSlide 65


66.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #6 Paul v.
Company · Insured claims to be totally disabled by low back pain · Daily activities include: · Morning hot tub · Watch news from bed · Home exercise routine · Study towards graduate degree in new field · When answering questions about efforts to secure new job, insured claims he spends time with his "blog" · Insured also mentions riding a bicycle to local meetings of a networking groupSlide 66


67.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES LITIGATION STRATEGY #5: Shop around.Slide 67


68.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #7 Penelope v.
Company · Insured worked as chiropractor and received full benefits for total disability due to low back pain · Claim file reflects inquiry through agent about ability to qualify for further benefits after career change · New claim involves impact of carpal tunnel syndrome on insured’s work as skin esthetician · Insured denies any work-related activity in past yearSlide 68


69.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES LITIGATION STRATEGY #6: Be ready to herd some cats.Slide 69


70.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Letter from Attorney "I have reviewed the underwriting and claim files. .
.
It appears the initial meeting with the agent was probably in February 2004, at which time Cynthia was given a binding receipt post-dated to March 17, 2004 (the date Cynthia would have premium funds available)."
Cynthia: Went to agent’s while shopping since just got tax refund Agent: No way (and no reason) to post-date binding receipt Binding Receipt: No coverage 60 days after application dateSlide 70


71.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Cynthia’s Testimony "I told the agent that Stacey was in a nursing home, had schizophrenia, was depressed and had hallucinations."
Agent: Would not have taken application if knew of those facts.
Underwriter: Application would have been denied without inquiry if those facts were known.
Cal.
Ins.
Code §332: An applicant who communicates some (but not all) facts which are material to the risk he or she is trying to insure is not excused from his or her failure to communicate other facts which are material to that risk.Slide 71


72.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES REAL CASE #4 Cynthia’s Kids v.
Company and Agent Cynthia’s Testimony "No one asked us any questions.
The agent must have filled out the application."
Agent had never met, talked to, or talked with anyone about Stacey, but application had her: · Address · Date of Birth · Social Security Number Agent had never met, talked to, or talked with anyone about Cynthia’s kids, but: · all 3 are named in application · all 3 have a different last name than CynthiaSlide 72


73.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Trial Strategy Number 1: Keep the stories straight.Slide 73


74.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Underwriter’s Perspective · 32 year old non-smoker · 5’1" and 120 lbs.
· No adverse medical/psychiatric history Claim Handlers’ Perspective · 32 year old smoker · "about" 260 lbs.
· Significant undisclosed medical/psychiatric history · Imposter at point of sale Jury’s Perspective · 309 lbs.
· Cynthia and her mother were told she was dying · Could not have been in agent’s office on either dateSlide 74


75.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Trial Strategy Number 2: Let the facts speak for themselves.
If they are enough to prove fraud, jurors will see it.Slide 75


76.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Trial Strategy Number 3: Remember the "simple" truth.Slide 76


77.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES Claim Management Considerations · Insurance fraud is a crime of opportunity.
· Did the opportunity simply present itself?
· Was the opportunity manufactured?
· Insurance fraud is prevalent because insurers’ remedies often are limited and there is little risk of prosecution.
· Understand what litigating a fraudulent claim is (and is not).
· Consider the potential for future claims under the policy.
· Make sure you have the stomach for it.Slide 77


78.
PROVING INSURANCE FRAUD REAL CASE STUDIES QUESTIONS?
Robert R. Pohls, Managing Attorney e-mail: rpohls@califehealth.com2011 Western Claim Conference Renaissance Esmeralda HotelSeptember 20, 2011 Indian Wells, California




####
document number 13: 
My journey to publication


Blogs


Next year my first book will be published.
Cue excited clapping, champagne glass-clinking and general happiness.

But first let me take a step back and tell you how this journey went, because it wasn’t, by any means, a short one.
It was fraught with failure, rejection and, to be perfectly honest, a lot of me swearing I was done writing (only to then start up again because I just can’t give up and I just can’t stop writing).

How it went


Wrote 1st book (2011)


Got agent (Dec 2011)


Didn’t get pub deal (2012)


Wrote 2nd book (2012)


Nada


Wrote 3rd book (2015-2016)


Got a new agent (June 2016)


Edited book for 5 months


Signed 2-book publishing deal (spring 2017)


Edited book for 4 more months


Publishing date delayed by 6 months


Date set for publication – Feb 2019.
That’s almost 3 years after signing with my agent for this book, 8 years from when I first started writing.



The moral to the story?

Writing a novel for traditional publishing is a long and arduous journey.
It is the emotional equivalent of standing in a warzone.
Rejections, long silences, criticism, put-downs, tempered with hope, anticipation and possibility.
It’s really, really tough, and you definitely need a thick skin and a few renditions of ‘Let It Go’ to be okay with it all.

My first go around with publishing was really difficult because I got all the way to the stage where my agent pitched my book to publishers, and that’s where it fell flat.
My book wasn’t marketable enough.

So when it came to my second go around (the third book I’d written), I was incredibly nervous.
I did my research and made sure I queried the agents who would be most interested in my book.
Getting my agent, Carly Watters, P.S. Literary Agency, turned out to be relatively painless.
On her suggestion I did a lot of editing, but I was really proud of the end result.
However, when she pitched my book to publishers the wait was excruciating.
Every day was pretty raw.
I was irritable with my loved ones, snappy and just incredibly prickly.
I’d been at this stage before and had the book knocked down, and I didn’t think I could handle that again.

Dreams coming true

But then it turned out there was not only one, but two publishers interested.
I was deliriously happy.
In the end I signed with editor Kate Dresser at Galley Books, an imprint of Simon and Schuster, because of her enthusiasm and vision for my book.

My book still isn’t out, and after a publishing delay won’t be until January 2019, but I’m still incredibly proud of how far I’ve come, and so grateful I stuck it out.
I really think there are so many talented writers out there, the difference is those who really wanted to be published didn’t give up.

As my mama always told me: "If at first you don’t succeed, try, try again."

And in this industry, that holds especially true.
It’s hard to wait, to pick yourself up and keep trying, but worse to regret not having tried in the first place.



####
document number 14: 
Daily Emunah Podcast - Daily Emunah By Rabbi David Ashear


ABOUT THIS EPISODE


More Than Anything?
We can't imagine how powerful words of praise to Hashem are, especially when they come from people who have what to complain about.
Phrases such as "Baruch Hashem," "Hashem is great," "Yishtabach Shemo" and "I love You Hashem" can make a person great.
When we really feel these words in the depths of our hearts, they can produce wonders.
Rabbi Lugasi told a story which recently took place in Israel about a couple who for many years did not have children.
After trying everything possible, they had no normal means of Hishtadlut left.
They had such a burning desire to have children, they decided to adopt.
The most important thing to them was to raise a family.
They went to apply at an adoption agency, filling out a lot of forms , answering a lot of questions, and even taking instructional sessions on taking care of children.
They happily went through the entire process, and afterwards they were told that there were no children available at the moment, but when something came up they would be notified.
After some time, a baby was born whose parents were not going to be able to care for it.
The couple was called and told that there is a baby available, but before they go to the hospital to pick up the child, they had to first go to the agency to answer a few more questions.
They got into the car with such excitement.
Finally their dream was going to come true.
When they arrived, the agent asked them if they would provide a warm and loving environment for the child.
They answered "Yes, of course."
The agent then asked if they would give the baby all of their love and attention.
Again they responded affirmatively.
She then asked if there is anyone they would love more than this baby.
They said, "Well, we are believers in Hashem.
We love Hashem so much, more than anything in the world.
But we will give the baby the love that it needs."
The agent was not happy with that response.
She said, "What if there is a conflict of interest?
You can't love anybody more than your child.
It must always be put first at all times."
The agent decided that these people were not fit to be parents.
"I'm sorry," she said, "It's not going to work out."
That was a devastating blow to the couple.
But they strengthened themselves, saying, "We didn't do anything wrong.
We do love Hashem more than anything.
If this is what He wants for us, then this is what we'll take."
That same year, just two weeks ago, that woman gave birth to a healthy baby boy.
The Pasuk says, "כי מכבד אכבד"- "I will honor those who honor Me", says Hashem.
The couple was not embarrassed to speak about their love of Hashem and they were not afraid to lose because of it.
Their Emunah is amazing.
That childless couple who had every reason to complain to Hashem and ask why He didn't give them children, instead displayed such a love for Him.
Hashem said to them, "Now, you will not have to depend on anybody else.
I am going to give you your own child."
Loving and praising Hashem can produce wonders.

Disclaimer: The podcast and artwork embedded on this page are from Rabbi David Ashear, which is the property of its owner and not affiliated with or endorsed by Listen Notes, Inc.



####
document number 15: 
The Real Story of Remdesivir


Taxpayers are spending at least $70.5 million to develop the drug

Remdesivir, an experimental COVID-19 treatment, has benefited significantly from public funding.
Based off publicly available data, Public Citizen estimates that taxpayers are contributing at least $70.5 million to develop remdesivir.
[1] The real number is likely higher.
We trace the story below.

Federal scientists helped discover remdesivir’s potential.

(Taxpayer support: at least $34.5 million)


In 2015, federal scientists screened a thousand compounds from a Gilead library in search of a molecule to target Ebola virus.
After identifying a remdesivir precursor, U.S. Army scientists worked with the corporation to "refine, develop and evaluate the compound.
"[2] The government partnership was "critical to the successful identification of [remdesivir].
"[3] A team led by federal scientists found that remdesivir was active against coronaviruses, "suggesting the potential for wider medical use.
"[4]

In addition to providing in-kind support, the Department of Defense funded Gilead directly.
A 2017 government report notes that DOD "is cost sharing with Gilead Biosciences [sic] for continued development of this product.
"[5] So far, DOD has given Gilead $34.5 million.
[6] The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has also led two Ebola remdesivir trials, likely supported by millions of taxpayer dollars.
[7] This laid the groundwork for the current response.

The NIH funded university researchers to study remdesivir’s effects against coronaviruses.

(Taxpayer support: at least $6 million)


As part of its nearly $700 million investment in coronavirus research, the NIH awarded University of North Carolina researchers a $6 million grant to accelerate the development of remdesivir.
[8] NIH researchers also made significant advances.
Federal scientists found that remdesivir could reduce lung damage in monkeys with an earlier coronavirus, as well as the new coronavirus.
[9]

National governments are running COVID-19 remdesivir clinical trials.

(Taxpayer support: at least $30 million)


Public funding is supporting many clinical trials across the world.
The World Health Organization, a European consortium, and Chinese public institutions all began remdesivir trials.
[10] In the U.S., the NIH is running a trial that will cost at least $30 million this fiscal year alone.
[11] Taxpayers are taking significant risk.
If remdesivir proves safe and effective, they should not have to pay twice.

[1] We draw on Knowledge Ecology International’s Briefing Note prepared by Kathryn Ardizzone, https://www.keionline.org/BN-2020-1

[2] https://www.usamriid.army.mil/press_releases/Travis%20ID%20Week%20FINAL.pdf

[3] Dustin Siegel et al., Discovery and Synthesis of GS-5734 for the Treatment of Ebola and Emerging Viruses, J Med Chem (2017).

[4] HHS, Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise Strategy and Implementation Plan (2017)

[5]

Id.


[6] OTA: W911QY1690001 ($33.3 million) and W911QY1630001 ($1.2 million).

[7] NCT03719586 and NCT02818582

[8] Public Citizen, Blind Spot (2020), https://www.citizen.org/article/blind-spot/.
For remdesivir specifically, see https://tinyurl.com/yd2ckoaf.
The NIH also awarded university researchers a $37.5 million grant to help develop treatments for coronaviruses, including remdesivir, among other projects.
https://tinyurl.com/ybyq4grb.

[9] https://tinyurl.com/sl2q638 and https://tinyurl.com/y9oartxq

[10] SOLIDARITY, INSERM (2020-000936-23), Chinese studies (NCT04252664, NCT04257656.)

[11] https://tinyurl.com/yakvqcja (NIH email correspondence with Wall Street Journal reporter).



####
